Contributing Circumstances Impact on Missouri 
Teenage Driver Crash Fatalities

by Jill M. Bernard and Donald C. Sweeney II

Missouri  data  from  2002-2011  are  used  to  analyze  the  major  circumstances  that  increase  the 
risk  of  fatality  in  crashes  involving  teenage  drivers,  given  a  motor  vehicle  crash  occurs.    The 
frequencies of contributing circumstances among teenage and older drivers are compared and a 
multinomial  logistic  regression  model  is  used  to  predict  the  probability  of  crash  severity  under 
different circumstances.  For crashes involving teenage drivers, it is found that driving too fast for 
conditions, speeding, inattention, and driving on the wrong side are the most frequent circumstances 
cited in fatal crashes, and are major factors that increase the likelihood of a fatality occurring.

INTRODUCTION 

Motor vehicle traffic crashes are the leading cause of death for United States teenagers (Miniño 
2010),  accounting  for  the  loss  of  over  2,800  teen  lives  in  2012  alone  (Insurance  Institute  for 
Highway Safety 2014).  It has been found that teenagers often lack adequate driving skills and 
exhibit poor driving judgment (University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute 2002), 
and teenage drivers are more likely than older drivers to exhibit reckless and risky behavior: i.e., 
drive at excessive speeds, violate traffic signals, follow too closely, overtake other vehicles in a risky 
manner, allow too little time to merge, and fail to yield to pedestrians (Williams 2003).  Accordingly, 
much research has examined the effect of specific factors on teenage driver fatalities and focused 
upon preventive measures to enhance teenage driver safety.

Graduated  Drivers  Licensing  (GDL)  programs  have  been  shown  to  enhance  teenage  driver 
safety and significantly reduce the rate of teenage driver fatalities.  Yet, it has been claimed that 
“reductions  in  fatal  crashes  were  greatest  in  states  that  had  enacted  other  restrictions  on  young 
drivers”  (U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  National  Institute  of  Health  2011).  
As a result, the purpose of this study is to analyze circumstances that may contribute to Missouri 
teenage  driver  fatalities  and  to  produce  information  relevant  for  the  enhancement  of  Missouri’s 
GDL program.  The analysis compares the frequency of contributing circumstances occurrences 
leading to fatal crashes of drivers 16 to 19 years old and older drivers, determines the probability of 
a fatal crash for teenage drivers given a contributing circumstance or combination of contributing 
circumstances, as well as explores the impact of contributing circumstances in combination with 
varying speed limits and environmental factors, (road surface, road alignment, road profile, road 
conditions, weather condition, light conditions) while controlling for the crash location (on or off 
the roadway) and number of occupants.  The paper concludes with findings that will be useful for 
legislation and education to aid in diminishing crash injury severity for teenage drivers.  

LITERATURE REVIEW  

In order to protect U.S. teenage and other drivers, all 50 states and the District of Columbia have 
imposed GDL restrictions on drivers under the age of 21.  GDL programs are designed to delay full 
licensure and phase in driving privileges (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration n.d.) 
with the intent to “encourage new drivers to acquire critical driving skills and experience in low-
risk and monitored settings” (Dee et al. 2005).  In a three-staged GDL program, new drivers begin 

5

JTRF Volume 54 No. 1, Spring 2015in  an  instructional,  supervised  practice  phase,  proceed  to  a  provisional  license  that  temporarily 
restricts unsupervised driving, and then graduate to an under 21 full driver’s license (Williams 2003, 
Mayhew et al. 1998).  Requirements for progressing through GDL’s three stages (learner’s permit, 
provisional licensure, and full licensure) vary across jurisdictions (Insurance Institute for Highway 
Safety, Highway Loss Data Institute 2011), but typically include adult supervision, restriction on 
nighttime driving, and limitations on transportation of young passengers (University of Michigan 
Transportation Research Institute 2002).

Many studies have been conducted to determine if these GDL policies are effective in reducing 
teenage crashes.  Foss et al. (2001) assessed crash rates before and after North Carolina’s GDL 
program  implementation,  and  discovered  that  crash  rates  declined  sharply  among  16-year-old 
drivers. Likewise, Shope and Molnar (2004) evaluated the effectiveness of Michigan’s GDL program 
by assessing the difference between motor-vehicle crash data for 16-year-old drivers pre-GDL and 
post-GDL. Results indicated that risk reduction for crash injury severity for all fatal and non-fatal 
injuries were substantial and impressive, and it was claimed that the “GDL remains promising.”  
Fohr  et  al.  (2005)  considered  the  implementation  of Wisconsin’s  GDL,  and  discovered  that  for 
16- and 17-year-olds both general and injury crash rates declined. The authors claimed that the 
decline was the result not of safer driving of teens, but rather due to reduced exposure to the risk of 
collision. Rios et al. (2006) developed a generalized linear model to assess the impact of Georgia’s 
Teenage and Adult Drivers Responsibility Act (TADRA) on the reduction of teenage driver fatalities. 
Findings indicated that speed-related teenage fatal crashes and alcohol-related teenage fatal crashes 
significantly decreased after the TADRA was enacted.  Additionally, Hyde et al. (2005) assessed 
if crash rates of 16-year-old drivers decreased after implementation of Utah’s GDL by examining 
overall crash rates, crash severity indicators, nighttime crashes, licensure status, seat belt usage, 
and citations. Using an interventional time series analysis, findings implied that the GDL program 
may have contributed to minimal reduction in teenage driver crashes, compared with other GDL 
evaluations. Ehsani et al. (2013) also used a time-series analysis to assess the impact of GDL on 
crash injury severity of 16-, 17- and 18-year-old drivers in Maryland, Florida, and Michigan.  Results 
suggested  that crash  rates  for  drivers  16  and  17  years  old  declined in  all  three states  following 
GDL implementation or revision, while crash rates for possible injury/property damage only for 
18-year-old drivers decreased in Maryland, increased in Michigan, and did not significantly change 
in Florida following GDL implementation or revision. Other recent studies have focused on the 
impact of contributing circumstances on crash injury severity for young people. Amarasingha and 
Dissanayake (2013) developed a multinomial model to examine the impact of contributory factors 
on crash severity for young drivers involved in crashes in Kansas. Findings suggested that failure 
to give time/attention, failure to yield, driving too fast for conditions, falling asleep, following too 
closely, and distraction/inattention increased the crash risk for young drivers, and such findings 
can be useful in teen driving safety efforts.  Similar to Amarasingha and Dissanayake (2013) and 
Ehsani et al. (2013), this study estimates the impact of contributing circumstances on crash injury 
severity for young drivers and considers the impact of these factors on the GDL policy. Yet, unlike 
the reviewed literature, this study concentrates specifically on the state of Missouri and explores 
possible scenarios to aid in enhancing Missouri teenage licensing policy.   

Missouri Graduated Drivers Licensing Program 

The Missouri GDL program was enacted as part of Senate Bill (SB) 19 passed in the 1999 legislative 
session,  and  put  into  effect  January  1,  2001.  The  legislation  requires  that  all  first-time  drivers 
between the ages of 15 and 18 years old complete a period of driving with a licensed driver followed 
by a period of restricted driving before graduating to an under 21 full driver’s license (Missouri 
Department of Revenue 2014).

6

Missouri Teenage Driver Crash Fatalities