Creating  a  Financially  Feasible  High-Performance 
Metropolitan Transportation System

by Patrick DeCorla-Souza

This	paper	assesses	a	strategy	to	alleviate	recurring	congestion	on	metropolitan	highway	systems	
by	adding	“dynamic”	capacity	during	peak	periods,	using	shoulders	as	travel	lanes,	along	with	
variable	peak-period	user	charges	levied	on	all	lanes,	to	manage	demand	and	pay	for	the	capacity	
improvements	and	complementary	multimodal	investments.	It	presents	an	analysis	of	the	traffic,	
delay,	fuel	consumption,	CO2	emissions,	and	cost	and	revenue	impacts.	The	paper	then	discusses	
various	technical	and	public	acceptance	issues	with	regard	to	the	concept,	and	how	these	issues	
might	be	addressed.		

INTRODUCTION

Background

Major metropolitan areas in the U.S. are facing increasing levels of highway congestion, but it is 
extremely expensive to widen highways in urban areas, and environmental and social constraints 
limit the ability to expand the highway footprint. The normal cost of construction to add a lane 
on an urban freeway is estimated at about $13.4 million per lane mile by the Federal Highway 
Administration  (2007).  Weekday  peak  period  use  of  a  lane  addition  amounts  to  about  10,000 
vehicles per weekday. As shown in Table 1, the cost per lane mile translates to a cost of about $7.00 
for a 20-mile trip made on an added urban freeway lane during peak periods.  

On the other hand, fuel taxes generated from a 20-mile trip amount to a total of only about 
40 cents, calculated based on fuel taxes averaging 40 cents per gallon and an average vehicle fuel 
efficiency rating of 20 mpg. The gap between user-based taxes and cost for a new lane is even 
higher for high cost urban freeways (see Table 1). Moreover, if new highway capacity is provided 
for use free of charge, it will continue to encourage low-density land use patterns and increased auto 
dependence, leading to a return to congestion.    

This  paper  assesses  a  new  financially  feasible  approach  to  address  metropolitan  mobility 
and  access  issues  that  involves  congestion  pricing  with  complementary  multimodal  strategies. 
Congestion pricing involves the imposition of variable tolls to manage demand during peak periods. 
By increasing the cost of travel perceived by commuters, it can reduce congestion and provide the 
revenue needed to make multimodal transportation infrastructure improvements.

  

Review of the Literature and State of the Practice

Congestion pricing has been discussed in the economics literature for over 150 years, beginning 
with the work of Dupuit (1844), Pigou (1920), and Knight (1924). During the 1960s, there was a 
revitalization of interest with the work of Walters (1961), the Smeed Report (Ministry of Transport 
1964), and Vickrey (1968). 

This early work led to the earliest implementation of congestion pricing in the form of an Area 
Licensing Scheme in the Singapore Central Business District (CBD) in 1975. This was followed by 
implementation of cordon-based pricing or “toll rings” in several Norwegian cities in the late 1980s 
and 1990s. In the 2000s electronic toll collection (ETC) facilitated the implementation of congestion 
pricing in the form of a charge to drive within Central London. Stockholm has implemented cordon-
based charges to drive into and out of the central city. Over the past 15 years, congestion pricing 

21

Metropolitan Transportation System

Normal Cost
$13,400,000
10,000
$1,340
$26,800
$1,742
$6.97
$0.40

Table 1: Costs for Highway Construction in Major Urban Areas
 
Construction cost per lane mile*
Daily traffic volume in peak periods
Construction cost per vehicle per mile
Construction cost for 20-mile round trip
Annualized construction cost for 20-mile round trip**
Cost for 20-mile round trip per working day
Gas tax paid for a 20-mile round trip
* Source: FHWA 2007 (2006 dollars)
** Annualization factor 0.065 assuming a 5.25% discount rate and 30 years
has also been implemented on some existing toll facilities in France and the United States, and on 
a few existing or new lanes on freeways in the United States, known as express toll lanes or High-
Occupancy Toll (HOT) lanes. HOT lanes are High-Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lanes which may be 
used by non-HOVs with payment of a toll.  With such priced lanes a two-class service is offered, for 
which users have a choice: a standard or “free” untolled service that may incur delay, and a premium 
or “express” service that offers higher speed for the price of a toll.

High Cost
$55,900,000
10,000
$5,590
$111,800
$7,267
$29.07
$0.40

As Lee (2009) has demonstrated, however, in many situations single-class unpriced	service 
may be better than two-class service with one class priced. Lee points out that splitting a facility 
into two classes reduces the effective capacity and total vehicle throughput of a facility.  He finds 
that the justification for more than one class of service requires that the preferences (value of time) 
among users be very heterogeneous, but peak period travelers are probably more homogeneous 
than  average  because  they  are  employed  and  have  higher  incomes.  He  concludes  that  the  only 
way a priced lane can be superior to a fully-priced single-class facility is if prices are charged on 
both classes of lane, standard and premium. Nevertheless, HOT and express toll lane projects with 
adjacent unpriced lanes continue to be implemented in the United States, and 62 more are in various 
stages of planning, development, and implementation (FHWA 2009).  They are publicly acceptable 
because generally no one is made worse off, since no existing general purpose lanes are priced.

Although  a  fully-priced  single-class  facility  might  be  economically  superior,  as  Lee  (2009) 
suggests, it has encountered obstacles to implementation due to public acceptance issues. This is 
understandable, because both the tolled and the tolled off (i.e., those who avoid using the road during 
the priced periods due to the new charges) are shown to be worse off under a constant value of time 
assumption (Hau 2005). Those who are tolled off are “forced” into less desirable modes, routes, or 
times of day. Those who are tolled are worse off on average because, in order to reduce demand, the 
toll must exceed the average value of time saved by the tolled as a result of the smoother flow of 
traffic.  If differences in time valuation for tolled motorists are taken into account, only those with 
the highest values of time are made better off.  Even those who had not been using the priced road 
before implementation of pricing (i.e., the “untolled,” such as those using public transit or those 
driving on alternative routes) may be made worse off as a result of more crowded buses or roads 
made more congested by diverted traffic.  The main beneficiary is the government, which benefits 
from the toll revenue.

Improving the Public Acceptance of Fully-Priced Facilities

The key to gaining public acceptability of any type of congestion pricing that involves tolling of 
existing free roads is the use of revenues.  Small (1992) suggests that two-thirds of the revenue be 
given back to the motorist via commuter allowances, reduced road user taxes, and a reduction in 
general taxes.  The other third would be used to pay for new road infrastructure, improvements in 
22

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010
public transit, and in public services to business.  Goodwin (1989) suggests that the revenue be 
arbitrarily divided such that a third would be used for new roadway infrastructure, a third would be 
allocated to improve public transport, and a third would be used to reduce the general tax burden or 
increase social spending.

This paper presents a direct approach for use of the revenues. It attempts to more directly “make 
whole” each of the three categories of travelers who are made worse off, i.e., the tolled, the tolled 
off, and the untolled. To benefit the tolled, it attempts to provide benefits commensurate with the 
value of tolls paid by providing significant travel time savings for them. This is accomplished by 
providing new highway capacity and advanced technologies that maintain the free flow of traffic and 
reduce the impact of incidents and accidents. To benefit the tolled off and the untolled, it enhances 
travel options, deploys new technologies for multimodal traveler information, and provides more 
effective traffic incident management and arterial traffic management.

The concept builds on emerging strategies implemented in Europe and now being explored by 
the transportation community in the United States as possible options for providing new highway 
capacity without the need for new rights-of-way or major reconstruction. However, the safety of 
these approaches has not yet been fully assessed in the U.S. context. Therefore, the concept proposed 
in this paper is not ready for immediate application. Rather, the intent is to engender discussion and 
further exploration through collaboration among the transportation planning, finance, safety, and 
operations communities to find workable strategies to advance the concept in the United States.  

FLEXIBLE AND EFFICIENT EXPRESS (FEE) HIGHWAYS

Providing Benefits for the Tolled

In congested metropolitan areas, a new “dynamic” travel lane could be created on limited access 
highways by narrowing existing lanes and using shoulder space. The shoulder travel lane would be 
open for use by authorized vehicles with trained drivers in conjunction with active management of 
all lanes on the highway, using overhead lane controls and dynamic message signs to harmonize 
speeds and keep traffic flowing freely and safely (Figure 1). During peak periods, variable user 
fees would be used in conjunction with ramp metering to keep demand for use within the capacity 
of the reconfigured highway. Should an incident occur in any lane, surveillance cameras would 
automatically communicate with overhead lane controls, which would shut down the appropriate 
lane(s) in advance of the incident location.

User fee rates would be pre-scheduled according to time of day and location in order to manage 
demand based on observed traffic patterns. Dynamic pricing, which involves changing toll rates as 
often as every few minutes in response to real time traffic conditions, would not be used. This is 
because when an entire highway facility is priced, it is necessary to pre-schedule toll rates so that 
travelers can make rational travel choices before they begin their trips. To accomplish the same effect 
on flow as dynamic pricing, ramp metering would be used to fine tune traffic volume on the priced 
facilities by controlling access to the highway when demand is too close to capacity. This will ensure 
that traffic flow does not break down. Fees would be collected electronically at free-flow highway 
speeds using in-vehicle electronic tags. Vehicles without valid electronic tags would be identified 
and charged using license plate recognition technology. Buses and pre-registered vanpools would be 
issued special transponders that would exempt them from the fees. 

Highway performance could be guaranteed to users. When an incident shuts down a lane or 
two, leading to congestion delays, all fees could be suspended since users would not get the level 
of service promised. The potential loss of revenue would provide an additional incentive to the 
highway operator to clear incidents quickly, and would reinforce the “fee for service” nature of the 
new charges in the minds of motorists.

This concept is termed “Flexible and Efficient Express” or FEE highways by the author, in 
order to reflect the “fee for service” aspect of this concept. It would require little or no new rights-

23

Metropolitan Transportation System
Figure 1:  Shoulder Travel Lane with Overhead Lane Controls in the Netherlands

of-way, could be financed by leveraging the user fee revenue stream, and could be implemented in 
a relatively short period of time due to limited or no expansion of the highway footprint.  Revenues 
from user fees could be used to pay for operations and maintenance, and for capital costs for shoulder 
improvements,  new  emergency  pull-off  areas,  tolling  infrastructure,  active  traffic  management 
systems, enhanced transit and ridesharing services to provide viable alternatives to driving alone, 
and traffic flow improvements on alternative free routes.

In addition to alleviating recurring congestion, FEE highways could increase person throughput 
as well as vehicle throughput. Vehicle throughput would increase because an extra lane (i.e., the 
dynamic shoulder travel lane) would be available for use when needed. Also, demand management 
with pricing and ramp metering would prevent traffic flow breakdowns and thus eliminate the loss 
of vehicle throughput that currently occurs on unmanaged highways due to breakdown of traffic 
flow at bottlenecks (DeCorla-Souza 2010). Person throughput would increase due to increased use 
of transit and ridesharing.

Limited access highways with standard lanes and shoulders could be re-striped as follows to 

create FEE highways:  

•	 Left shoulder with reduced width, if feasible;
•	

11-foot-wide  lanes,  i.e.,  the  lanes  would  be  reduced  from  the  standard  12-foot  width, 
similar to narrowing of lanes in construction zones and on other urban facilities which 
accommodate heavy vehicles, albeit at lower speeds;

•	 A 13-foot-wide dynamic shoulder lane on the extreme right. (The wider lane is needed to 
allow for adequate lateral clearance between vehicles in the lane and any structures on the 
highway’s edge.)

Providing Benefits for the Tolled Off and the Untolled

Since costs for highway expansion would be significantly reduced by the FEE highway concept and 
users of all lanes would be charged tolls, a significant surplus of revenues is anticipated. (An analysis 
to confirm this is presented later in the paper). The FEE concept would use surplus revenues for the 
benefit  of  the  tolled  off  and  the  untolled by  investing  in  complementary strategies as  discussed 
below.

24

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010
Enhancement  of  travel  choices.  Bus  Rapid  Transit  (BRT),  express  bus  and  bus  priority 
systems (e.g., signal preemption) would create a “backbone” of fast and frequent transit service, 
supplemented with vanpooling, regular carpooling, and flexible carpooling. Flexible carpooling is 
similar to “slugging” as practiced in Northern Virginia, Houston, and the San Francisco Bay area, 
but with pre-certification of drivers and riders (Minett 2010a and 2010b).  With flexible carpooling, 
potential carpoolers gather at designated locations and are picked up by a solo driver who seeks to 
qualify for use of HOV lanes or to avail himself or herself of HOV toll discounts or exemptions on 
priced facilities. This type of carpooling would supplement transit services and help reduce costs for 
operating peak period transit services while offering commuters an additional travel choice.

Flexible  telecommuting.  Incentives  would  be  provided  to  employers  to  allow  some  of  their 
employees to telecommute each morning until peak period tolls are no longer in effect and then 
drive in to work, or to leave work before peak tolls are in effect and then work from home.

Off-peak transit use incentives. If transit vehicles are too crowded in peak hours, some pressure 
could be relieved by off-peak or peak shoulder discounts or other incentives, such as the chance to 
win a lottery (Merugu, Prabhakar, and Rama 2009).

Technology. Pre-trip decisions on mode and time of travel could be made easier for the traveler 
by  incorporating  technologies  for  timely  and  reliable  multimodal  traveler  information.  Those 
who  continue  to  drive  could  benefit  from  investment  in  technologies  that  provide  traffic  flow 
improvements, more effective traffic incident management, arterial and corridor management, and 
safety and mobility management in work zones.

Implementation

With  so  many  different  components  and  innovations,  it  will  be  difficult  to  implement  the  FEE 
highway concept all at once.  Moreover, it is important to ensure that all strategies that are designed 
to provide better travel options are in place before actual congestion charging begins so that the 
public has time to become fully aware of the new options, and to ensure that they are all working 
effectively.  Implementation of FEE highways might be pursued by corridor.  The first step could be 
creation of shoulder travel lanes and use by transit and vanpool vehicles with trained drivers.  This 
could be followed by opening up the lanes for use by carpools with three or more persons (with 
trained drivers) to provide a carpooling incentive.  With these multimodal alternatives in place, 
the final step would be implementation of full pricing on all lanes along with multimodal traveler 
information systems and active traffic management.

Public-private partnerships (PPPs) could be used to increase the potential for innovation and 
on-time delivery. One type of PPP arrangement attempts to address the conflict between the private 
sector goal to maximize revenue and the public goal to maximize vehicle throughput. Under this 
method, termed “Concurrent Real and Shadow Tolling” (DeCorla-Souza 2006), the concessionaire 
would  have  freedom  to  set  the  toll  rates  needed  to  ensure  free-flowing  traffic  during  congested 
periods, but all “excess” charges above a benchmark flat toll rate (called a shadow toll) specified in 
the concession agreement would go the public authority.  To maximize its shadow toll revenue, the 
private operator would need to maximize vehicle throughput, thus maximizing public goals.  
 
IMPACTS

Traffic Volumes, Speeds and Travel Times

Table 2 presents results from a traffic impact analysis of the FEE highway concept for a 10-mile 
highway segment with six existing lanes (i.e., three per direction) reconfigured to four lanes per 

25

Metropolitan Transportation System
direction  (i.e.,  total  of  eight  lanes).  For  comparison,  a  “No  Pricing”  alternative  with  the  same 
configuration was also analyzed, and the results are presented in Table 3.  

The analysis was performed for a prototypical urban freeway that is severely congested, using 
procedures from the Highway	Capacity	Manual	(Transportation Research Board 2000), i.e., the 
HCM, and the following inputs and analytical procedures:

•	 The existing urban freeway is assumed to have standard 12-foot-wide lanes and a standard 

10-foot-wide right shoulder.

•	 Existing traffic demand is assumed to be at the maximum level that can be accommodated 
without breakdown of traffic flow (but at slow speeds), known as Level of Service E (LOS 
E).  In reality, many segments of urban highways operate under breakdown flow conditions 
involving queuing.  This is known as Level of Service F (LOS F).  The LOS E traffic 
demand assumption provides a conservative estimate of benefits from pricing. For long-
term analysis, a 5% (total) secular growth is assumed in order to account for population and 
economic growth.  This throws the facility into breakdown flow conditions, i.e., LOS F.

•	 To be conservative in estimating benefits, it is assumed that there will be no change in 
travel mode. An increase in transit and carpool use would increase person throughput on 
the FEE highway, and consequently the benefits. 

•	 For the No Pricing alternative, induced and diverted traffic resulting from the increased 
capacity is estimated using elasticity of travel demand relative to travel time, rather than 
elasticity  relative  to  total  generalized  cost  of  travel,  because  the  other  components  of 
generalized  cost  perceived  by  motorists  (i.e.,  vehicle  operating  cost  and  accident  risk) 
will not change significantly as a result of capacity expansion. A short-term elasticity of 
demand relative to travel time of -0.28 and a long-term elasticity of -0.57 is used based on 
prior studies (DeCorla-Souza and Cohen 1997).  Induced traffic is estimated in the column 
titled “GP Lanes (Initial)” in Table 3. A total of 984 vehicles per hour (vph) is induced, 
amounting to a 14% increase above the base case traffic volume of 6,930 vph.
It is assumed that a minimum speed of 55 mph is to be maintained on the FEE highway, 
and traffic volume on the highway is estimated on that basis. As indicated earlier, dynamic 
“real time” pricing is not needed because ramp metering would be used to hold at the 
entrance ramps any excess demand that threatens to reduce speeds below that threshold.  
Note that the FEE highway can accommodate more vehicles than in the base (six-lane) 
configuration due to the additional travel lane in each direction (see Table 2).  However, the 
pricing mechanism curbs the higher level of induced travel seen in Table 3 when all lanes 
are unpriced. A small amount of induced traffic raises traffic volume to 7,069 vph, a 2% 
increase above the base case traffic volume of 6,930 vph.

•	 Free flow speeds for 12-foot lanes are estimated at 65 mph based on Exhibit 13-6 of the 

•	

HCM.

•	 Free flow speeds for 11-foot lanes are based on Exhibit 23-4 of the HCM; these speeds are 
further reduced due to reduced right shoulder lateral clearance, based on Exhibit 23-5 of 
the HCM. The resulting free flow speed is estimated at 60.7 mph.

•	 Actual operating speeds are estimated based on the Bureau of Public Roads (BPR) formula, 
with parameters from Nakamura and Kockelman (2002). The BPR formula and parameters 
used are explained in the footnotes of Table 2. Actual travel speeds are estimated at 46 mph 
for No Pricing and 55 mph for FEE highways. 

Highway lane capacity is estimated as follows:
•	 For existing 12-foot-wide general purpose lanes, capacity is estimated at 2,350 vph, based 

•	 Base lane capacity for 11-foot-wide general purpose lanes is estimated as follows, based 

on Exhibit 13-6 in the HCM. 

on Exhibit 23-3 of the HCM: 

o	 Capacity of 11-foot-wide lane = 1,700 + (10 x Free flow speed) = 1,700 + (10 x 

60.7) = 2,307 vph.

26

Table 2: Traffic Impacts on a 10-mile long 6-Lane Freeway Reconfigured into Four FEE 
 

Lanes per Direction

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010

Existing 

Configuration  
6,930
3
2,310
2,350
0.65
1,528
1.51
0.02
10
65.00
0.92
2.08

Four FEE 
Lanes
 
Traffic volume (demand)
7,069
4
Number of lanes per direction
1,767
Traffic volume per lane
2,307
Capacity per lane 
0.65
Ratio of service flow volume at LOS C* to capacity
1,500
Service flow volume per lane at LOS C 
1.18
Ratio of traffic volume to service flow volume at LOS C
0.02
BPR alpha (α) coefficient**
10
BPR beta (β) coefficient**
60.70
Free flow speed (mph)
0.99
Travel time per mile with free flow speed (min.)
1.09
Actual travel time per mile (min.)
Time saved per mi. relative to Existing Configuration 
0.99
(minutes)
55.01
Speed (mph)
*LOS C = Level of Service C.  Engineers grade quality of service on roadway facilities at six levels, A through 
F,  with  LOS A  representing  the  best  operating  conditions  and  LOS  F  the  worst.  LOS  C  is  considered  an 
operating service level “acceptable” to users.  LOS F represents conditions where traffic flow has broken down 
on a freeway.
** The Bureau of Public Roads (BPR) formula estimates travel time on a facility based on free-flow speed and 
the ratio of traffic volume to service flow volume at LOS C.  Based on the BPR formula, actual travel time = 
free-flow travel time x (1+ α (ratio of traffic volume to service flow volume at LOS C)β).

28.87

Other Impacts

Tables  4  and  5  present  other  impacts  of  the  FEE  highway  and  the  No  Pricing  alternatives, 
respectively.  Safety impacts have not been estimated.  Since this is a prototypical analysis, user 
benefits (other than safety) are estimated using national average coefficients. For any specific urban 
area, coefficients and results would be different.  The analytic procedures were as follows:

•	 Time  savings. Time  saved  by  induced  and  diverted  travelers  on  free  lanes  for  the  No 
Pricing alternative is estimated at half the time saved by prior travelers on the free lanes, 
consistent with consumer surplus theory. Value of time saved is calculated based on the 
nationwide average value of time per vehicle hour from the Urban	Mobility	Report	(Texas 
Transportation Institute 2007).

•	 Fuel cost savings. Fuel consumption savings due to reduced delays is estimated at 0.69 
gallons per hour of delay saved based on the relationship between congestion delay and 
fuel consumption in Exhibit 1 of the 2007 Urban	Mobility	Report	(Texas Transportation 
Institute 2007). Fuel cost is estimated at $2.50 per gallon.

•	 Annualization  of  benefits.  Congestion  levels  are  assumed  to  prevail  only  during  four 
hours per direction on each weekday, on 250 working weekdays per year.  For example, 
the inbound	direction of an urban radial freeway may be congested for three hours in the 
morning, but for only one hour in the afternoon, for a total of four hours each day.

•	 Toll Rates.  Recall that FEE highways seek to ensure that the benefits (primarily travel 
time savings) to tolled vehicles are at least equal to the value of the toll paid, to ensure that 

27

Metropolitan Transportation System
Table 3: Traffic Impacts on a 10-mile 6-Lane Freeway Reconfigured to Four Free Lanes per 
 

Direction with No Pricing

 

Four Free Lanes with No Pricing

Existing 

Configuration

Free Lanes 

(Initial)

Free Lanes 
incl. Induced 

traffic

Total

6,930

3

2,310

2,350

0.65

1,528

1.51

0.02

10

65.00

0.92

2.08

6,930

7,914

7,914

4

4

1,733

2,307

0.65

1,500

1.16

0.02

10

4

1,978

2,307

0.65

1,500

1.32

0.02

10

60.70

60.70

0.99

1.07

1.01

0.99

1.30

0.77

28.87

55.96

46.00

 
Traffic Impacts

Traffic volume (demand)

Number of lanes per direction

Traffic volume per lane

Capacity per lane 
Ratio of service flow volume at LOS C 
to capacity
Service flow volume per lane at LOS C 
Ratio of traffic volume to service flow 
volume at LOS C
BPR alpha coefficient

BPR beta coefficient

Free flow speed (mph)
Travel time per mile with free flow 
speed (minutes)
Actual travel time per mile (minutes)
Time saved per mi. relative to Existing 
Configuration  (minutes)
Speed (mph)

Induced Travel Estimation
Elasticity of demand relative to travel 
time
Initial VHT* at before expansion speeds

Initial VHT after facility expansion

Initial VHT savings

Delay VHT per additional VMT**

-0.28

240.02

123.84

116.17

0.05

984

Induced travel 
*VHT = Vehicle hours of travel, i.e., travel time x traffic volume
** VMT = Vehicle miles of travel, i.e., traffic volume x distance

28

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010
they are not made worse off with pricing.  This means that the toll rate will be governed 
by the value of time of the tolled vehicle with the lowest value of time.  This is used to 
estimate toll rates.   Toll rates are estimated based on travel time saved by tolled vehicles 
(relative to the base case six-lane highway configuration), average value of time from the 
Urban	Mobility	Report	(Texas Transportation Institute 2007), the distribution of the value 
of time of all freeway motorists under No Pricing (HDR Inc. 2009), and the percentage 
of vehicles that would be tolled off with pricing based on the difference between the total 
traffic on the highway with No Pricing from Table 3 (i.e., 7,914 vph) and the number of 
vehicles that can be accommodated on the FEE highway while meeting the 55 mph speed 
target (i.e., 7,069 vph).   

•	 Annual revenue.  For annual revenue estimation, it is assumed that toll-exempt vehicles 
average  200  passenger  car  equivalents  per  hour  per  lane.  Congestion  levels  (and  the 
estimated fees) are assumed to apply only during four hours per direction on each weekday, 
on 250 working weekdays per year.  However, revenue estimates based on these four hours 
are increased by 25% to account for revenues during shoulder hours. Tolling will be needed 
during shoulder hours to manage traffic that shifts from the peak hours to avoid the higher 
tolls during those hours. 

•	 Greenhouse  gas  emissions.  To  estimate  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  it  is  assumed  that 
10% of total fuel consumed during peak periods is diesel fuel, and 90% is gasoline. The 
following relationships (HDR Inc. 2009) are used: 

8.8 + 0.25* speed.

and 10,084 grams per gallon of diesel.

o	 Fuel efficiency (miles per gallon) is estimated based on speed, using the relationship: 
o	 CO2 emissions per gallon are estimated based on 8,788 grams per gallon of gasoline 
The  results  of  the  analyses  for  the  two  alternatives,  for  the  first  year  after  implementation,  are 
presented in Tables 4 and 5 and summarized in Table 6. The results suggest that in the first year the 
FEE highway alternative will provide much higher user benefits, i.e., almost $38 million annually, 
vs.  $31.25  million  for  No  Pricing.  It  will  also  result  in  more  greenhouse  gas  reductions,  i.e.,  a 
28% reduction in peak period emissions, vs. a 10% reduction for No Pricing. Long-term analysis 
results, also presented in Table 6, show more striking differences.  They show that as traffic demand 
increases and throws the facility into breakdown flow conditions, user benefits from FEE highways 
would be about twice the user benefits from No Pricing, i.e., $66 million vs. $33 million annually.  
In the long term, the No Pricing alternative will increase peak period greenhouse gas emissions by 
7%, vs. a 39% reduction for FEE highways. 

29

Metropolitan Transportation System
Table 4: Other Impacts on a 10-mile 6-Lane Freeway Reconfigured to Four FEE Lanes 
 

per Direction

 
User Benefits on 10-mile Facility
Facility length (mile)
Total travel time on facility per mile (min)
Total delay reduced per mile (minutes)
Average value of time ($/hour)
Value of delay savings/mile/peak hour/direction
Number of directions
Peak hours per weekday for both directions
Number of weekdays per year
Value of delay savings per mile annually
Value of annual delay savings for full facility
Annual delay savings for 10-mile facility (hours)
Annual delay savings per 10-mile trip on the facility (hours)
Fuel cost per gallon
Gallons of fuel saved annually
Value of fuel saved
Total delay and fuel cost saved annually
Toll Revenue on 10-mile Facility
Travel time saved in priced lanes (min/mi)
Percent of traffic volume reduction relative to No Pricing
Percentile in WTP distribution
Average toll rate per mile
Average toll for 10-mile trip
No. of exempt vehicles/hour (passenger car equivalents)
Factor to account for revenue during shoulder hours
Annual toll revenue
Greenhouse gas emissions on 10-mile Facility
Fuel consumption rate (mpg)
Annual fuel consumption (gallons)
CO2 emissions per gallon
CO2 emissions annually (metric tons)
Percent change with 4 FEE lanes

Existing 

Configuration  

Four FEE 

Lanes

10.00
14,401

2
4
250

16
8,652,619
8,918
77,161

10.00
7,711
6,980
$14.60
$1,698.47
2
4
250
$3,396,934
$33,969,345
2,326,667
41
$2.50
1,605,401
$4,013,501
$37,982,846

0.99
-12%
12%
$0.10
$0.97
200
1.25
$16,593,749

23
6,269,372
8,918
55,908
-28%

30

Table 5: Other Impacts on a 10-mile 6-Lane Freeway Reconfigured into Four Free Lanes 
 

 with No Pricing

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010

 
User Benefits on 10-mile Facility
Facility length (mile)
Total travel time on facility per mile (min)
Total delay reduced per mile (minutes)
Average value of time ($/hour)
Value of delay savings/mile/peak hour/direction
Number of directions
Peak hours per weekday for both directions
Number of weekdays per year
Value of delay savings per mile annually
Value of annual delay savings for full facility
Annual delay savings for 10-mile facility (hours)
Annual delay savings per 10-mile trip on the facility hours)
Fuel cost per gallon
Gallons of fuel saved annually
Value of fuel saved
Total delay and fuel cost saved annually
Greenhouse gas emissions on 10-mile Facility
Fuel consumption rate (mpg)
Annual fuel consumption (gallons)
CO2 emissions per gallon
CO2 emissions annually (metric tons)
Percent change with four Free Lanes

Existing 

Configuration

 

10.00
14,401

2
4
250

16
8,652,619
8,918
77,161

Four Free 
Lanes with 
No Pricing

10.00
10,323
5,742
$14.60
$1,397.18
2
4
250
$2,794,363
$27,943,633
1,913,947
30
$2.50
1,320,624
$3,301,559
$31,245,192

20
7,797,092
8,918
69,531
-10%

31

Metropolitan Transportation System
Table 6: Summary of Short-Term and Long-Term Impacts of Alternative Reconfigurations 
 

of a 10-Mile Six-Lane Freeway

Short-Term
User Benefits
   Annual delay reduced per 10-mile trip (hrs.)
   Annual value of user benefits ($millions)
Revenues
   Charge for 10-mile trip ($)
   Annual revenues ($millions)
Sustainability
   Change in peak period CO2 emissions (%)
Long-Term
User Benefits
   Annual delay reduced per 10-mile trip (hrs.)
   Annual value of user benefits ($millions)
Revenues
   Charge for 10-mile trip ($)
   Annual revenues ($millions)
Sustainability
   Change in peak period CO2 emissions (%)

Four FEE 
Lanes

No Pricing

41
$37.98

$0.97
$16.59

-28%

71
$65.93

$1.97
$33.78

-39%

30
$31.25

$0.00
$0.00

-10%

29
$33.65

$0.00
$0.00

7%

REGIONWIDE APPLICATION OF THE FEE HIGHWAY CONCEPT

A typical large metropolitan area such as Seattle, WA, or Washington, DC, has a freeway network 
of about 300 miles or 1,800 lane miles. Table 7 shows results from an extrapolation of the impacts 
estimated for a 10-mile highway to a 300-mile highway network.  Preliminary cost estimates for 
conversion of standard highways to FEE highways, including tolling and active traffic management, 
have  been  prepared  for  a  study  in  progress  by  Booz Allen  Hamilton  for  the  Federal  Highway 
Administration.  Based on this study, annualized capital and operating costs (in real dollars) are 
estimated at about $500 million for the No Pricing alternative and $610 million for the FEE highway 
alternative.  

Estimated user benefits, shown in Table 7, for both alternatives exceed these costs by 87% in the 
first year (short term), but benefits increase by significant amounts in the long term with growth in 
demand.  User benefits in the long term are almost $2 billion annually for FEE highways, resulting 
in a benefit-cost ratio of 3.24. For No Pricing, the comparable user benefits are over $1 billion, 
resulting in a benefit-cost ratio exceeding 2.02.  

Table  7  suggests  that,  for  a  300-mile  congested  network,  the  FEE  highway  concept  could 
generate almost $0.5 billion in toll revenue in the first year after implementation. In the longer 
term, annual revenues could be as much as $1 billion annually. All revenue estimates are in real 
dollars, and the long-term revenue estimates are conservative because the value of time parameter 
was not adjusted to account for the increases in real wage rates that can be expected over time. The 
No Pricing alternative generates no toll revenue. Revenues for the 300-mile FEE highway network 
concept fall short of costs in the first year by about $110 million (i.e., $610 million in costs vs. about 
$0.5 billion in toll revenue), but estimated long-term revenues are more than adequate to cover the 
annualized costs, generating over $400 million in toll revenue surpluses annually (i.e., $610 million 

32

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010
in costs vs. about $1.01 billion in revenue).  The stream of surpluses could be leveraged to fund 
multimodal transportation investments and other strategies to benefit the tolled off and the untolled.  

Table 7: Summary of Short-Term and Long-Term Impacts of Alternative Reconfigurations 
 

of a Regional Network of Freeways

 Short-Term
Number of miles of freeway (avg. 6 lanes)
Annual value of user benefits ($millions)
Annual revenues ($millions)
Annual costs ($millions)
Benefit/cost ratio
Annual surplus (+) or deficit (-)

 Long-Term
Number of miles of freeway (avg. 6 lanes)
Annual value of user benefits ($millions)
Annual revenues ($millions)
Annual costs ($millions)
Benefit/cost ratio
Annual surplus (+) or deficit (-)

ADDRESSING THE ISSUES

Safety 

Four FEE 
Lanes
300
$1,139
$498
$610 
1.87 
($112.19)

300
$1,978
$1,013
$610 
3.24 
$403.39 

No Pricing
300
$937
$0
$500 
1.87 
($500.00)

300
$1,010
$0
$500 
2.02 
($500.00)

A summary of research on the safety impacts of narrower lanes is provided by Ng and Small (2009).  
The authors find that both theoretical and empirical evidence linking narrow lane design to safety 
are ambiguous. According to the authors, it is an open question whether narrow lanes would in fact 
reduce safety. They suggest that it would depend on factors that vary from case to case, especially the 
speeds chosen by drivers. They cite several innovations in Europe that offer hope that roads designed 
for lower speeds could be accompanied by measures to ensure that lower speeds in fact prevail. 
For example, they point out that variable speed limits have been used for many years in Germany 
and the Netherlands, and recently in Copenhagen, primarily to smooth traffic during the onset of 
congestion—but also with a strong reduction in injury accidents in one German implementation.

A  study  by  the  Midwest  Research  Institute  (Bauer  et  al.  2004)  suggests  that  the  observed 
increases in accident frequency when freeways in the United States have been re-striped to narrower 
lanes cannot necessarily be attributed to the use of narrower lanes or the conversion of a shoulder to 
a travel lane.  The authors suggest that the use of the added narrow lanes as HOV lanes introduces 
a difference in speed between adjacent lanes, which may be another explanation for the increase in 
accidents. The FEE highway concept eliminates these speed differentials, since vehicles in all lanes 
travel at essentially the same free-flow speed when all lanes are priced. 

Nonetheless, the use of shoulders as travel lanes does present safety challenges, which need 
to be addressed. For example, protocols will need to be developed for emergency response when 
the shoulder is being used as a travel lane. The first project in the United States to use a shoulder 
as travel lane “dynamically” during peak periods was implemented on I-35W in Minneapolis in 
October 2009, and the United States will learn from that experiment. 

33

Metropolitan Transportation System
Impacts on Alternative Free Routes

The FEE highway’s capacity will be higher than the existing highway’s capacity, due to the extra 
FEE lane. If the FEE highway were available for use free	of	charge during peak periods, it could 
be expected that some drivers who currently drive on parallel facilities to avoid congestion on the 
highway would shift to the FEE highway, reducing traffic on the parallel facilities. Peak period 
fees charged on the FEE highway will need to be high enough to keep excessive traffic away and 
maintain free flow of traffic on the expanded capacity. However, fees must also be low enough to 
ensure that the FEE highway is fully utilized.  This will ensure that net diversion to alternative free 
routes does not occur. 

Some drivers who do not value their time very highly (and have low willingness to pay) are 
likely to shift to free parallel surface facilities. However, this shift in traffic to free facilities is likely 
to be counterbalanced by shifts in traffic from free facilities to the FEE highway by those who value 
the time savings more highly than the fees charged on the FEE highway. 

A  redistribution  of  traffic  will  occur  based  on  driver  values  of  time,  but  not  necessarily  a 
significant increase in traffic either on the FEE highway or on parallel free facilities. Only drivers 
who have very low values of time will be tolled off.  This does pose an equity issue with regard to 
low-income drivers, and is discussed later in this paper (see Public Acceptance Issues).

Overall Congestion Reduction Impacts

In a typical large city, VMT on limited access highways tends to exceed VMT on arterials. For 
example, Seattle’s 2007 daily VMT on limited access highways was 30.6 million, vs. only 27.1 
million for arterials (Texas Transportation Institute 2009). However, a major portion of the delay 
faced  by  travelers  tends  to  be  on  limited  access  highways,  so  FEE  highways  could  alleviate  a 
majority of the recurring congestion delay in metropolitan areas.  

The advantage of limiting pricing to limited access highways is that it can be implemented 
in the short term using existing proven transponder-based technologies which are already widely 
deployed in the United States. Recent research under the National Cooperative Highway Research 
Program (Sorenson et al. 2009) explored other technology that could potentially be used to collect 
ubiquitous user charges. When they are further developed and deployed in the future, they could 
potentially be used to complement the FEE highway concept by deploying pricing on roads off the 
FEE highway system.

Public Concerns About Fairness

Imposing new charges on existing toll-free roads raises fairness concerns. Many people believe 
they have already paid for existing roads with their taxes, and new charges would amount to double 
taxation. However, experience shows that if the public understands the high costs for reconstruction, 
rehabilitation, and expansion of highway facilities, they may accept congestion pricing as one way 
to help pay for these costs while receiving improved mobility from congestion relief.  The SR 520 
floating bridge in the Seattle metropolitan area will become the first existing toll-free facility in the 
United States to charge new tolls that will vary by time of day to achieve performance targets.  The 
public in Seattle understands the high costs to replace the SR 520 bridge, and that tax dollars will be 
insufficient to pay for these costs.

Public opinion surveys suggest that the public is more accepting of new charges if they are 
convinced that revenues from new charges will go directly towards providing improved transportation 
service on the facilities on which the charges are imposed.  The public accepts toll roads because 
they can see that the revenues go to support the specific facility on which they pay tolls (Zmud and 
Arce 2008). 

34

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010
The public will need to understand that tolls would only be charged during peak hours with FEE 
highways – unlike regular toll roads.  If road users understand that FEE highways are not regular 
toll roads, they could be convinced that the new charges will be a just and fair “fee for service” that 
goes to provide improved peak period service made possible by the extra physical capacity being 
provided.  In South Africa’s Johannesburg/Pretoria metropolitan area, 115 route miles of existing 
freeway are being widened and an additional 236 route miles are being upgraded, all of which will 
be funded through new electronically charged tolls on the existing free system (Poole 2009).  This 
demonstrates that concerns about “double taxation” can be alleviated when the new charges are 
directly related to the extra benefits being provided. 

Concerns About Equity for Low-Income Drivers

Due to the increase in capacity with FEE highways, few motorists (if any) would need to be “tolled 
off” – so tolls would be relatively low and quite affordable.  Like vehicle property taxes in some 
states, tolling could be made more progressive by charging toll rates that vary based on value of 
the vehicle being tolled.  Yet valid concerns may be expressed that the new fees may make it too 
expensive for low-skilled workers to get to their jobs, because low-skilled jobs are often not well 
served by public transit.  Also, low-income workers tend to have jobs with fixed schedules, and 
pricing may be particularly unfair to those with less flexible work schedules since they are unable 
to shift their time of travel.    

A well-designed FEE highway pricing strategy can be less burdensome to low-income citizens 
with appropriate use of toll revenue.  With a portion of the toll revenue dedicated to transit, low-
income transit riders can benefit significantly from toll-financed transit improvements. Policymakers 
can also include protections for low-income individuals, such as “life-line” credits or toll discounts, 
or reimbursements for tolls paid. For example, a proposal for congestion pricing in New York City 
by its mayor in 2008 would have provided reimbursements to low-income individuals qualifying 
for the federal earned income credit. They would be reimbursed for any charges in excess of the fare 
for a transit trip.  

Concerns About Administrative Costs 

Concerns are often expressed about the high administrative costs for implementing and operating 
a  congestion  pricing  scheme  relative  to  other  ways  of  generating  revenue  from  highway  users.  
Operating costs amount to about 20% of revenue for a normal toll facility, based on a study in 
progress  for  the  National  Cooperative  Highway  Research  Program  (NCHRP  project  19-08).  By 
comparison, collection of fuel taxes costs only about 1% of revenue.

Yet congestion pricing may be justified despite the high costs, because costs for implementation 
and operation are significantly exceeded by the benefits. The purpose of congestion pricing is not 
simply to collect revenue, but also to achieve other economic, social, and environmental goals. 
If the same amount of revenue as generated from congestion pricing were instead to be raised by 
fuel taxes, costs for revenue collection would indeed be lower, but the loss of benefits would be 
far greater than the cost savings. For decision making, the costs for implementation and operation 
of FEE highways must be compared with benefits, not with revenues collected. As Table 7 shows, 
the  value  of  incremental  user  benefits  alone  (i.e.,  time  and  fuel  cost  savings)  would  far  exceed 
incremental costs for implementation and operation of FEE highways relative to the No Pricing 
alternative. Long-term incremental user benefits for a 300-mile FEE highway network relative to  
a No Pricing network with the same configuration are almost $1 billion annually (i.e., $1.9 billion 
minus $1.0 billion), vs. incremental costs of only $110 million annually (i.e., $610 million minus 
$500 million).

Synergistic combinations of FEE highways and supporting strategies should be subjected to 
a comparative benefit-cost or cost-effectiveness evaluation and compared with other traditionally 

35

Metropolitan Transportation System
funded  alternatives. The  long-range  transportation  planning  process  undertaken  by  metropolitan 
planning  organizations  (MPOs)  could  be  used  to  inform  the  public  about  costs  and  benefits  of 
alternative approaches. This would begin a discussion about the tradeoffs between conventional 
transportation investment approaches and approaches involving congestion pricing.  The MPO in 
Seattle is showing the way in the United States. Five synergistic pricing alternatives were recently 
analyzed and presented for consideration by the public for the Year 2040 Regional Transportation 
Plan for the Seattle area (Puget Sound Regional Council 2009).  This led to adoption by policymakers 
of a fully-priced highway network as part of the Year 2040 Regional Transportation Plan in May 
2010.

Concerns About Privacy

Proposals  to  price  the  entire  network  of  highways  and  surface  streets  using  global  positioning 
systems (GPS) have raised significant privacy concerns.  Even if the detailed information on travel 
never  leaves  the  vehicle  (as  proposed  with  some  concepts),  there  is  a  concern  that  information 
stored  electronically  on  in-vehicle  units  is  insecure  and  may  become  available  to  unauthorized 
persons.  However, privacy does not appear to be a major concern with pricing of only the limited 
access highway network using transponder-based toll collection technology as envisioned for FEE 
highways.    In  a  focus  group  study  on  such  a  strategy  (Petrella,  Biernbaum,  and  Lappin  2008), 
privacy was not an issue that resonated strongly or generated much discussion with most participants, 
perhaps because vehicle identification technology would be restricted to limited access highways 
only, and information on trip origins and destinations off the tolled system would not be collected.    
All operating HOT lane projects in the United States and more than 250 other toll facilities 
across the country use electronic toll collection (ETC). Yet, some people continue to be concerned 
about the privacy impacts of ETC. In response, tolling agencies have devised a method to protect 
the public’s privacy by linking the transponder and the driver’s personal information with a generic, 
internal account number that does not reveal the driver’s identity and that is not disclosed to other 
organizations. In many cases, a motorist can open an anonymous pre-paid account if he or she so 
chooses, although there have been very few who have signed up. Singapore has alleviated privacy 
concerns by collecting tolls using smart cards with stored value that are inserted into an in-vehicle 
unit.  These “electronic purses” are replenishable at Automated Teller Machines (ATMs), and may 
also be used for other purchases unrelated to tolling. However, the in-vehicle units needed for such 
systems are far more expensive than the typical transponders used in the United States.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

A sketch-level analysis of the FEE highway concept presented in this paper suggests that it could 
prove  to  be  a  financially  feasible  way  to  create  a  high-performance  metropolitan  transportation 
system.  However, more detailed assessments of the opportunities and options in specific metropolitan 
areas will be needed, and safety challenges will need to be addressed. The intent of this paper is to 
stimulate further exploration and discussion of the concept and to generate other ideas.

References

Bauer, Karin M., Douglas W. Harwood, Warren E. Hughes, and Karen R. Richard.  “Safety Effects 
of Narrow Lanes and Shoulder-Use Lanes to Increase Capacity of Urban Freeways.” 	Transportation	
Research	Record	1897.  Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, (2004): 71-80.

DeCorla-Souza, Patrick and Harry Cohen.  “Accounting for Induced Travel in Evaluation of Urban 
Highway  Expansion.”    Transportation  24(2),  (1997):  107-123.  Http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/steam/
doc.htm.

36

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010
DeCorla-Souza, Patrick.  “Implementing Congestion Pricing on Metropolitan Highway Networks 
with Self-Financing Public-Private Partnerships.” Journal	of	the	Transportation	Research	Forum	
45(1), (2006): 5-22.  

DeCorla-Souza, Patrick. “A Freeway Congestion Pricing Paradox.” Presented at the Transportation 
Research Board Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., 2010.

Dupuit, J. “On the Measurement of the Utility of Public Works.”  Annales	des	Ponts	et	Chaussses, 
2nd series, 8, 1844, reprinted in Transport, edited by D. Munby, (1968): 19-57.

Federal  Highway Administration.  2006	 Status	 of	 the	 Nation’s	 Highways,	 Bridges,	 and	 Transit:	
Conditions	 and	 Performance.	 Appendix	 A:	 Highway	 Investment	 Analysis	 Methodology.  HERS 
Highway Improvement Cost Inputs, 2007. Http://www.fhwa.dot.gov /policy/2006cpr/appa.htm.

Federal Highway Administration. Current	Toll	Road	Activity	in	the	U.S.:	A	Survey	and	Analysis, 
2009. Http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/ipd/pdfs/2008_toll_activity_white_ paper.pdf.

Goodwin,  P.  “The  Rule  of  Three:  A  Possible  Solution  to  the  Political  Problem  of  Competing 
Objectives for Road Pricing.” Transport	Engineering	and	Control 30, (1989): 495-497.

Hau,  Timothy.  “Economic  Fundamentals  of  Road  Pricing:  A  Diagrammatic Analysis,  Part  1  – 
Fundamentals.” Transportmetrica 1(2), (2005): 81-117.  

HDR,  Inc.  TRUCE-ST	 User’s	 Guide.  Prepared  for  the  Federal  Highway Administration,  2009. 
Http://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/tolling_pricing/value_pricing/tools/index.htm.

Knight, F. H. “Some Fallacies in the Interpretation of Social Cost.”  Quarterly	Journal	of	Economics 
38, (1924): 582-606.

Lee, Douglass B., Jr.  “Toward the Evaluation of Value Pricing.” Transportation	Research	Record	
No.	2079, Transportation Research Board, (2008): 71-88. 

Merugu, Deepak, Balaji S. Prabhakar, and N.S. Rama. “An Incentive Mechanism for Decongesting 
the  Roads:  A  Pilot  Program  in  Bangalore.”  Http://netecon.seas.harvard.edu/NetEcon09/Papers/
Merugu_09.pdf.

Minett, Paul. “Enabling a Flexible Ridesharing Response to Congestion Pricing.” Presentation at the 
Innovations in Pricing of Transportation Systems Conference & Workshop, Orlando, Florida, May 
2010a. Http://www.flexiblecarpooling.org /fcdecongestionpricing.pdf.

Minett,  Paul.  “Not  Only  Seeing,  But Also  Knowing  Who  is  in  the  HOV.”  Presentation  at  the 
Innovations in Pricing of Transportation Systems Conference & Workshop, Orlando, Florida, May 
2010b.  Http://www.flexiblecarpooling.org /fcdecongestionpricingtechnology.pdf.

Ministry of Transport. Road	Pricing:	the	Economic	and	Technical	Possibilities	(the	Smeed	Report), 
1964.

Nakamura, K. and K. Kockelman. “Congestion Pricing and Roadspace Rationing: An Application to 
the San Francisco Bay Bridge Corridor.” Transportation	Research 36A (5), (2002): 403-417.  

Ng,  Chen  Feng  and  Kenneth  Small.  “Tradeoffs  Among  Free-flow  Speed,  Capacity,  Cost,  and 
Environmental Footprint in Highway Design, 2009.” Http://www.economics.uci.edu/docs/2008-09/
small-04.pdf.

37

Metropolitan Transportation System
Petrella,  Margaret,  Lee  Biernbaum,  and  Jane  Lappin.    “Exploring  a  New  Congestion  Pricing 
Concept:  Focus  Group  Findings  from  Northern  Virginia  and  Philadelphia.”  Volpe  National 
Transportation Systems Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2008. Http://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/tolling_
pricing/resources/report/cpcfocusgrp/congestion_focus_grp.pdf.

Pigou, A.  The	Economics	of	Welfare.  Macmillan, London, 1920. 

Poole,  Robert.  “Surface  Transportation  Innovations.”  Reason	 Foundation.  Issue  No.  74,  Los 
Angeles, California, 2009.

Puget  Sound  Regional  Council.  “Transportation  2040:  Draft  Environmental  Impact  Statement, 
2009.” Http://psrc.org/projects/trans2040/deis/index.htm.

Small, K. “Using the Revenues from Congestion Pricing.” Transportation	19, (1992): 359-381. 

Sorensen, Paul, Liisa Ecola, Martin Wachs, Max Donath, Lee Munnich, and Betty Serian. National 
Cooperative  Highway  Research  Program  (NCHRP)  Web-Only  Document  143:  “Implementable 
Strategies for Shifting to Direct Usage-Based Charges for Transportation Funding.” Transportation 
Research Board, Washington, D.C., 2009.

Texas Transportation Institute. 2007	Urban	Mobility	Report:	Appendix	A. Texas A & M University, 
College Station, Texas, 2007.

Texas  Transportation  Institute.  2009	 Urban	 Mobility	 Report.  Texas A  &  M  University,  College 
Station, Texas, 2009. Http://mobility.tamu.edu/ums/congestion_data/tables /seattle.pdf.

Transportation Research Board. Highway	Capacity	Manual. National Research Council, Washington, 
D.C., 2000.

Vickrey, W. S. “Congestion Charges and Welfare: Some Answers to Sharp’s Doubts.”  Journal	of	
Transport	Economics	and	Policy	95, (1968):107-118.

Walters, A. A. “The Theory and Measurement of Private and Social Cost of Highway Congestion.” 
Econometrica	29, (1961): 676-699.

Zmud, Johanna and Carlos Arce. “Compilation of Public Opinion Data on Tolls and Road Pricing.” 
NCHRP Synthesis 377.  Transportation Research Board, 2008. Http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/
nchrp/nchrp_syn_377.pdf.

Patrick DeCorla-Souza	is	the	Tolling	and	Pricing	Program	manager	at	the	U.S.	Department	of	
Transportation’s	Federal	Highway	Administration.		In	this	role,	Patrick	coordinates	and	oversees	
road	pricing	research	and	initiatives	across	the	United	States,	and	works	with	public	and	private	
sector	partners	nationwide	to	implement	innovative	road	pricing	strategies.	Patrick	has	master‘s	
degrees	in	transportation	planning	and	civil	engineering,	and	co-chairs	the	Transportation	Research	
Board’s	Congestion	Pricing	Committee.		

38

