Empirical Examination of Passing Lane 
Operational Benefits on Rural Two-Lane Highways
by Ahmed Al-Kaisy and Zachary Freedman

This	paper	presents	an	empirical	investigation	into	the	operational	benefits	of	passing	lanes	on	
rural	two-lane	highways.	Two	study	sites	in	the	state	of	Montana	were	used	in	this	investigation.		
Performance	was	examined	at	a	single	location	upstream	and	multiple	locations	downstream	of	the	
passing	lane	at	each	study	site.	Using	percent	followers	as	a	performance	measure,	operational	
benefits	right	after	the	passing	lane	ranged	between	33%	and	42%	at	one	study	site	and	12%	to	
19%	at	the	other	study	site	under	prevalent	traffic	levels.	Study	results	also	suggest	that	operational	
benefits	persist	for	a	remarkable	distance	beyond	the	end	of	the	passing	lane.	

INTRODUCTION

Two-lane highways constitute the vast majority of the highway system in the United States.   Those 
highways  are  known  for  higher  level  of  interaction  between  vehicles  traveling  in  the  same  as 
well as in opposing directions.  Specifically, passing maneuvers are typically performed using the 
opposing lane when sight distance and gaps in the opposing traffic stream permit.  This has serious 
implications for traffic operations and safety.  From a traffic operations perspective, limited passing 
opportunities would result in higher impact of slow-moving vehicles on mobility and performance.  
As traffic level increases and passing opportunities become more restricted, passing lanes are 
used in practice as one of the most effective means in providing passing opportunities, thus breaking 
up platoons and improving operations.  In practice, the use of passing lanes is often considered more 
appropriate than the costly alternative of upgrading to continuous four-lane highway sections.  Also, 
it is a practice to provide passing lanes periodically at regular intervals on long stretches of rural 
two-lane highways.

For the proper use of passing lanes on two-lane highways, their effect on performance needs to 
be accurately assessed both at the location of the passing lane and for some distance downstream, 
i.e., beyond the end of the passing lane. The term “effective length” of passing lane is used by the 
Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) to refer to the total length of the passing lane and the distance 
downstream, where the effect of the passing lane persists (TRB 2000).  Knowing the operational 
benefits and the effective length of a passing lane would allow the selection of the most appropriate 
length and frequency of passing lanes on longer stretches of two-lane highways.  In this time of 
increasing fiscal constraints, this information is critical in achieving optimum use of the limited 
highway improvement funds.  

BACKGROUND 

The HCM 2000 includes a procedure for the analysis of passing lanes on two-lane highway segments 
(TRB 2000).  For two-lane highways, the HCM uses two service measures, percent time-spent-
following (PTSF) and average travel speed (ATS).  PTSF is defined as “the average percentage of 
travel time that vehicles must travel in platoons behind slower vehicles because of an inability to 
pass” (TRB 2000).  The procedures assume that the PTSF within the passing lane is 58% to 62% of 
its upstream value (value immediately before the passing lane) while ATS within the passing lane is 
8 to 11% higher than its upstream value.  Also, the procedure provides values for the effective length 
of passing lanes, which varies between 3.6 and 13 miles based on traffic volume for PTSF, versus a 
constant 1.7 miles for ATS.   

53

Passing Lane Operational Benefits

While there are quite a few studies on passing lanes in the literature, only a small number of 
studies attempted to assess the operational benefits and effective length of passing lanes.  Most of 
those studies were largely dependent on traffic simulation, and some used limited field data in the 
calibration of simulation models.  The most relevant of those studies are discussed in this section.

In a relatively recent study (Woolridge et al. 2002), researchers investigated the optimal passing 
lane length and spacing on two-lane highways. Field data were collected from study sites in Kansas 
and  Minnesota  and  used  later  in  calibrating  the  simulation  model TWOPAS.  Simulation  results 
showed that the percent time-delay (measured as the percentage of headways less than five seconds) 
decreased as the passing lane length increased.  Based on traffic volumes and type of terrain, the 
optimal length of passing lane varied from 0.8 to 2.0 miles and the optimal spacing between passing 
lanes varied from 3.5 to 11 miles.

May  (1991)  used  a TRARR  traffic  simulation  model  to  investigate  the  operational  benefits 
and the effective length of passing lanes. The results suggested that for passing lanes between 0.5-
2.0 miles in length, benefits tended to diminish after about 2.0 miles. The study also investigated 
five passing lane locations with different volumes and lengths in California. Overall, passing lanes 
reduced the percent time-delay and the percentage of headways less than two seconds with the 
exception of one site where slight increases were observed.    

A study by Harwood and Hoban (1987) investigated the optimal length and spacing of passing 
lanes using simulation.  The study used different traffic volumes and lengths of passing lanes, which 
varied in the range 0.25 mile to 2.0 miles.  Results showed that for a flow rate of 400 vehicles per 
hour (vph) the benefits persisted for at least seven miles from the beginning of the passing lane, 
while for a flow rate of 700 vph almost all the benefits diminished after five miles. Another earlier 
study evaluated the effect of passing lanes on operations using the TWOPAS simulation model that 
was calibrated using field data (Harwood and St. John 1986). The researchers found that the effective 
length of passing lanes was in the range of three to eight miles. They also found that higher flow 
rates led to shorter effective lengths.  The effective length refers to the total length of the passing 
lane and the distance downstream, where the effect of the passing lane persists (TRB 2000). The 
same researchers investigated 12 passing lane sites in several states in an attempt to determine the 
effective length and spacing of passing lanes (Harwood and St. John 1985).  At each site, automatic 
traffic recorders were placed at locations upstream, within, and up to one mile downstream of the 
passing lanes where six hours of field data were collected. Using four-second headway or less in 
identifying platooned vehicles, the study showed that the number of vehicles in a platoon decreased 
from 35.4 % directly upstream of the passing lane to 20% within the passing lane. Just downstream 
of the passing lane the percentage increased to 29%.  One mile downstream of the passing lane the 
number of platooned vehicles was 3.5% lower than the upstream value.  The average platoon length 
decreased from 2.9 vehicles to 2.7 vehicles before and after the passing lane, respectively.

Mutabazi, Russell, and Stokes (1999) conducted a simulation study to determine the optimum 
passing-lane configuration to reduce delay. Traffic data were gathered from two sites in Kansas, 
US-54 and US-50, for calibration of TWOPAS simulation software.  The simulation was then used 
to determine the best configuration of passing lane. The results showed that percent time delay 
was equivalent for the side-by-side configuration and head-to-head configuration; however, percent 
delay was higher for all other configurations. 

RESEARCH MOTIVATION

Results from the above mentioned studies show that there is little guidance, if any, in answering the 
following questions: what are the operational benefits of passing lanes and how far downstream do 
these benefits persist?  The answer to these questions is very important in the planning and design 
of passing lanes on two-lane highways.  

Results from previous studies lack consistency as they varied in too wide of a range to be 
of any meaningful use.  For example, while a study by May (1991) claims that for passing lanes 

54

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010
between  0.5-2.0  miles  in  length,  benefits  tended  to  diminish  after  about  2.0  miles.  The  HCM 
(TRB 2000) suggests that benefits may exist for 13 miles beyond the passing lane.  Other studies 
suggested different values between the former two values (Harwood and Hoban 1987, Harwood 
and St. John 1986). Similar inconsistencies exist in the reported benefits of passing lanes that are 
measured immediately downstream from the passing lane taper. Those inconsistencies may largely 
be attributed to the following two reasons:
1.  The  measures  of  performance  used  in  estimating  the  benefits  of  passing  lanes  in  previous 
studies are not consistent.  Specifically, different values for headways were used to identify 
platooned vehicles by previous research efforts.  For example, some studies used three-second 
headway (Al-Kaisy and Karjala 2008, Gattis et al. 2006), four-second headway (Harwood and 
St. John 1985), and five-second headway (Woolridge et al. 2002, May 1991; Taylor and Jane 
1991, Harwood et al. 1985) in identifying platooned vehicles. 

2.  The majority of the already limited published research on this topic relied largely on using traffic 
simulation models.  Many of those studies are somewhat outdated and used early versions of 
simulation models that may not provide realistic results. Further, the difficulty in obtaining 
appropriate field data may have compromised the necessary validation of these models using 
field observations.      
In light of the above, there is a need to conduct empirical research that would provide a more 
reliable  assessment  of  passing  lane  benefits  using  the  performance  measures  currently  used  in 
practice.

PASSING LANE EFFECT ON PLATOONING: THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVE

This study aims to investigate the effect of passing lanes on two-lane highway operations and the 
distance downstream of the passing lane where this effect persists, commonly referred to as the 
passing lane effective length.  

Figure  1  shows  the  hypothesized  performance  on  two-lane  highways  in  the  presence  of  a 
passing lane.  It is somewhat simplistic and very consistent with a similar figure provided in Exhibit 
20-22 in the HCM (2000) where the percent time-spent-following is used as a platooning measure.  
The figure shows the theorized change in platooning level versus position prior, within, and past 
the passing lane. Upon arriving at the passing lane, traffic on a two-lane highway with restricted 

Figure 1:  Theoretical Graph Showing Platooning Level Within and Downstream of a Typical 
 

Passing Lane on a Two-Lane Highway 

55

Passing Lane Operational Benefits
passing  opportunities  is  expected  to  have  a  relatively  high  platooning  level.  Upon  entering  the 
passing lane section, traffic is distributed on the two available lanes, with slower vehicles typically 
using the passing (right) lane and faster vehicles remaining on the normal (left) lane. This speed-
based segregation usually results in passing maneuvers, improved speeds, and decline in platooning 
level.  At the end of the passing lane section, vehicles in the passing lane have to move back into the 
normal lane, merging with the rest of traffic using a taper. 

At this point, all vehicles share again the original travel lane; however, slower vehicles are not 
necessarily leading platoons at this point. This denotes less impedance to traffic, higher average 
speeds, and improvement in quality of service.  As traffic moves downstream farther from the passing 
lane,  faster  vehicles  catch  up  with  slower  vehicles  and  platooning  level  is  expected  to  steadily 
increase until it eventually reaches its original level (pre-passing-lane value). The stable original 
level of platooning is based on the assumption that there are no changes in geometric features or 
passing restrictions throughout the site except for the presence of the passing lane. 

STUDY APPROACH 

This study used empirical observations to investigate the effect of passing lanes on platooning and 
performance on rural two-lane highways.  Only highways that are located in rural settings, typically 
characterized by relatively low volumes and high speeds, are considered within the scope of this 
study.  Further, climbing lanes (passing lanes on extended upgrades) are considered beyond the 
scope of the study.   

The study approach required the selection of passing lane sites where the passing lane and a 
significant distance downstream are free from major access points and are generally located in level 
terrain.  Several data collection stations were installed upstream and at various distances downstream 
of the passing lane using automatic traffic recorders.  Three performance measures were estimated 
to discern the effect of the passing lane and the change in that effect as traffic traverses and moves 
away from the passing lane.  Those performance measures are:  
1. 

Percent  Followers:  Percent  followers  represent  the  percentage  of  vehicles  with  short 
headways in the traffic stream. Specifically, a follower is a vehicle following another vehicle 
in the traffic stream with a short headway in between. This performance indicator can easily 
be measured in the field and as such is used by the HCM as a surrogate measure for PTSF 
field estimation. The headway cut-off value used by the current HCM is three seconds, which 
is the same value used in this study.  
Follower Density: Follower density is the number of followers in a directional traffic stream 
over a unit length such as a mile or a kilometer. It is estimated as the product of density and 
percent followers, as in the following equations: 
(1)  Follower Density = Density * Percent Followers 
(2)  Follower Density = (Hourly Flow Rate / Average Speed) * (% Headways < three seconds) 
The argument behind using this performance indicator is that a road with low average daily 
traffic (ADT) and high PTSF should have a lower level of service (LOS) than the same road 
with a higher ADT and PTSF equal to the low ADT road (Van As 2003).	This is particularly 
true in the context of highway improvement decision making for which the LOS and other 
operational analyses are important inputs.  
Average Travel Speed as a Percentage of Free-Flow Speed (ATS/FFS): This is an indicator 
of the amount of speed reduction due to platooning on two-lane highways.  In the context of 
this research, if the percentage is high, then the interaction among successive vehicles in the 
traffic stream is small, and a low platooning level is expected.  By the same token, a lower 
percentage indicates a higher level of platooning.   

2. 

3. 

56

For  details  on  the  above  measures,  please  refer  to  a  recent  study  on  two-lane  highway 

performance measures (Al-Kaisy and Karjala 2008).

DATA COLLECTION AND REDUCTION

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010

To investigate the effect of passing lanes on a platooning level, it was necessary to consider the 
following criteria in the selection of study sites:
1.  No  major  driveways  or  intersections  exist  within  the  passing  lane  and  for  some  distance 

upstream and downstream. 

2.  As practically as possible, the site should be free of tangible grades (grades greater than 2%) or 

other features that are believed to affect platooning on two-lane highways.  

3.  The site should possess geometric features that are considered typical for other passing lanes 

on rural two-lane highways.   

The above criteria followed in the selection of study sites made it difficult to identify appropriate 
sites for this study.  Upon examining seven candidate sites, only two sites largely met the criteria 
above and were therefore selected for the study.  As-built roadway drawings, video logs, and Google 
earth images were all used in screening candidate study sites.  

Study Site I. This site is located on Highway US 287 between the towns of Three Forks and 
Townsend in the state of Montana. Townsend is approximately 5.5 miles upstream of this site and 
therefore the impact of any traffic interruption on platooning is considered minimal, if any.  The total 
length of the site is about 8.25 miles including the length of the passing lane, which is approximately 
1.5 miles (including tapers).  The major merit of this site is the relatively long distance downstream 
that met the selection criteria.  Traffic level at this site is relatively low.   

Study Site II. This site is located on Highway US 191 just north of the Gallatin canyon in 
southwest Montana. The upstream end of this site is about 30 miles from the nearest intersection, 
and as such no effect on platooning is expected. The total length of this site is approximately 2.5 
miles including the length of the passing lane, which is about 0.9 miles (including tapers). The 
distance downstream is limited to 1.5 miles, which is relatively short. However, traffic level at this 
site is notably higher than that at the US-287 site, which is important to this investigation.  

Data  collection  setups  at  the  two  study  sites  are  shown  in  Figure  2.  Seven  data  collection 
stations were installed at the US-287 site versus four stations at the US-191 site. The first station 
at both sites is located 250 feet upstream of the passing lane.  As applicable, the other stations are 
located at roughly 250 feet, 0.5 miles, 1.5 miles, 3 miles, 5 miles, and 6.6 miles downstream of the 
passing lane, respectively.  The distances mentioned were measured from the end of the passing lane 
tapers.  Automatic traffic recorders were used to measure traffic counts, individual vehicle speeds, 
vehicle classification, and headways.  

Data were collected over a one-week period in May 2008. Due to a malfunction in the traffic 
recorder at the upstream station at the US-287 site, additional data from the upstream and downstream 
stations were collected over a one-week period in June 2008.  A total of 1,583 hours (about 66 days) 
of traffic records with more than 222,000 observations were collected at the two study sites.

Traffic records were thoroughly screened to make sure that any defective data were eliminated 
from the data sets.  Also, to avoid any possible effect of light condition and rain on performance 
measures, only daytime periods with dry weather were used in this study.   

57

Passing Lane Operational Benefits
Figure 2:  Data Collection Setup (a) US 287 Study Site (b) US 191 Study Site

STUDY RESULTS 

The hypothesized platooning level graph shown in Figure 1 was tested using analyses that aim at 
exploring the association between performance, the presence of passing lane, and the distance past 
the end of the passing lane.  The terms “platooning” and “performance” will be used interchangeably 
in the following sections. While two sites were used in this study, only the US-287 site was used 
throughout the analysis. The other site, the US-191, was used for the preliminary examination and 
analysis of headway distribution only. The main reason for not including the US-191 site in the 
statistical analyses is that this site did not allow the investigation of adequate distance downstream 
of the passing lane, which was necessary for examining the effect of the passing lane on platooning.  

Preliminary Examination  

The  first  step  in  testing  the  research  hypothesis  was  to  examine  performance  measures  at  data 
collection stations to discern trends in platoon dispersion and formation as related to the presence 
of passing lanes.  

To assess the immediate effect of the passing lane on performance, a comparison of performance 
measures between the upstream and downstream stations is provided in Table 1. Traffic levels at 
the two sites were established based on the observed traffic volumes at the two study sites. Upon 
carefully examining this table, the following observations can be made.

58

Table 1: Changes in Performance Measures over the Passing Lanes at Study Sites 

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010

US 287 Site
Upstream

Downstream

Percent Change

Performance Measure

Percent Followers
Follower Density
ATS/FFS

Percent Followers
Follower Density
ATS/FFS

Performance Measure

Percent Followers
Follower Density
ATS/FFS

Percent Followers
Follower Density
ATS/FFS

Percent Followers
Follower Density
ATS/FFS

Average Hourly Volume = 130 vph

36.3
0.697
0.98

21.4
0.400
0.99

Average Hourly Volume = 155 vph

27.1
0.564
0.96

40.8
0.922
0.98

US 191 Site
Upstream

-41.05
-42.67
0.81

-33.58
-38.83
-1.43

Downstream

Percent Change

Average Hourly Volume = 110 vph

25.32
0.37
0.984

21.03
0.33
0.969

Average Hourly Volume = 200 vph

38.79
1.04
0.987

31.49
0.888
0.948

Average Hourly Volume = 330 vph

53.31
2.45
0.984

46.61
2.28
0.954

-16.94
-11.71
-1.52

-18.82
-14.62
-3.95

-12.57
-6.94
-3.05

1.  The percent changes in performance measures are greater at the US-287 site relative to the US-
191 site.  This is consistent with the fact that the passing lane at the US-287 site is considerably 
longer than that at the US-191 site.  

2.  The  headway-related  measures,  i.e.,  percent  followers  and  followers’  density,  have  shown 
remarkable  improvements  at  the  two  study  sites  under  various  traffic  conditions.    These 
improvements are more notable at lower traffic levels.  

3.  Changes in the third performance measure (ATS/FFS) are relatively small particularly at lower 

traffic levels.    
To examine the part of the platooning graph beyond the passing lane, the three performance 

measures were plotted at various stations downstream of the passing lane as shown in Figure 3.  
The following important trends are clearly exhibited in this figure:  
1.  Percent followers and follower density exhibit improvement in performance for a relatively 
short distance downstream of the passing lane.  While this trend applies to the two study sites, it 
is more evident at the US-287 site, where a considerable downstream distance was investigated.  
Also, the improvement is somewhat more notable at higher traffic levels.

59

Passing Lane Operational Benefits
2.  Beyond the 1.5 mile station (US-287 site), platooning level increases steadily as traffic moves 
away from the passing lane.  This trend is common to all performance measures used in this 
study.    

3.  The  increase  in  platooning  level  in  these  graphs  does  not  flatten  out  or  reach  a  plateau  as 
suggested by the hypothesized platooning curve.  This may be an indication that the operational 
benefits of the passing lane continue well beyond 6.6 miles, the farthest distance investigated 
in this research.  

Figure 3: Change in Performance Measures Downstream of Passing Lanes at Study Sites

60

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010
While the first observation may initially sound unexpected, it can easily be understood if one 
thinks about the dynamics of breaking up platoons by passing lanes more at the microscopic level. 
Initially, vehicles arrive at the passing lane location with relatively high level of platooning.  As 
vehicles enter into the passing lane, a portion of vehicles, including the slower moving vehicles, 
usually take the passing (right) lane. This maneuver normally takes place at the taper location, but 
some vehicles may change lanes later into the passing lane section. This will allow faster vehicles 
on the normal (left) lane to travel at higher speeds, not impeded by the once platoon leaders, the 
slower moving vehicles.  Eventually, many of the faster vehicles will pass the slower vehicles within 
the passing lane. As the passing lane comes to an end, vehicles in the passing lane have to merge 
back into the normal lane.  This merge activity creates short headways, as many vehicles are forced 
to accept shorter headways moving back into the normal lane. Those vehicles may need to adjust 
their speed, which is normal in a similar merge situation. As a result, platooning level (denoted by 
the presence of short headways) becomes “relatively” high right after the passing lane.  However, 
platoons at the downstream end of the passing lane are different in attributes from those at the 
upstream end, as the former are largely associated with the aforementioned merge activity, while 
the latter are mostly associated with slower vehicles impeding the movement of faster vehicles. As 
vehicles move farther from the passing lane, some vehicles adjust the short headways to their comfort 
level, thus reducing the percentage of short headways and hence platooning level. This activity takes 
place over a short distance beyond the passing lane, which could be a function of traffic level. On 
the other hand, the impedance of slower vehicles to faster vehicles, which was largely diffused by 
the passing lane, starts to build up again as vehicles move farther from the passing lane and faster 
vehicles eventually catch up with the slower vehicles. This explains the increase in platooning level 
at the stations beyond the 1.5-mile station at the US-287 site.

To better understand the magnitude of change of performance measures as traffic moves farther 
from the passing lane, the percent of change for each performance measure is plotted downstream 
of the passing lane at the US-287 site as shown in Figure 4. While the change in the ratio of average 
speed to free-flow speed is minimal, changes in headway-related measures are quite notable. This 
indicates that the headway-related measures investigated are more sensitive to platooning on two-
lane highways than the speed ratio. 

Table 2 shows  the difference in performance between the upstream station and the farthest 
downstream station at the US-287 site using headway-related performance measures.  The figures 
presented in this table show that the residual operational benefits at 6.6 miles downstream of the 
passing lane are fairly high.  This suggests that the effective length of the passing lane could extend 
a considerable distance beyond the location of this station.    

Table 2: Residual Operational Benefits at 6.6-Miles Station (US-287 Study Site)

Average Hourly Volume = 130 vph

Performance Measure

Upstream

Percent Followers
Follower Density

36.3
0.697

6.6 miles 
Downstream

25.8
0.510

Residual Benefits

28.93%
26.85%

Average Hourly Volume = 155 vph

Performance Measure

Upstream

Percent Followers
Follower Density

40.8
0.922

6.6 miles 
Downstream

27.7
0.617

Residual Benefits

32.11%
33.08%

61

Passing Lane Operational Benefits
Figure 4:  Percent Change in Performance Measures Downstream of the Passing 
 

Lane at US-287 Study Site

Average Hourly Volume = 130 vph

Percent Followers

Follower Density 

ATS/FFS

e
g
n
a
h
C

45%

35%

25%

15%

5%

-5%

- 15% 

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Distance Downstream of Passing Lane (mi)

Average Hourly Volume = 155 vph

Percent Followers 

Follower Density 

ATS/FFS 

e
g
n
a
h
C

15%

10%
5% 
0%  
-5%

-10%

-15%

-20%

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Distance Downstream of Passing Lane (mi)

62

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010

Examination of Headway Distribution     

As platooning is directly related to headways, headway distributions were plotted at the two study 
sites using a three-interval scheme as shown in Figure 5. Upon examining this figure, it is evident 
that short headways (less than three seconds) have dropped remarkably at the downstream station in 
comparison with that just before the passing lane at the two study sites.  

However, there is sufficient evidence that the actual improvement in performance could be even 
greater if one considers the merge effect and its associated short headways as discussed earlier.  This 
explains the further decrease in short headways over the following station(s): 0.5-mile station at the 
two study sites and 1.5-mile station at the US-287 site.  Beyond this point, the percentage of short 
headways generally increases, indicating an increase in the platooning level.

Figure 5:  Headway Distribution at Data Collection Stations at Study Sites 

63

Passing Lane Operational Benefits

At the US-287 site, this percentage remains lower than the original percentage at the upstream 
station.  This may well indicate that, for the traffic level investigated, operational benefits of the 
passing lane persist for a distance longer than the distance investigated in this research (6.6 miles). 
On the other hand, the percentage of long headways (nine seconds or greater) generally increases, 
and the medium size headways (three to nine seconds) decreases beyond the downstream station.  
This  may  indicate  an  increased  level  of  vehicle  segregation  into  platooned  and  non-platooned 
vehicles and hence into longer and shorter headways.  At the US-191 site, trends are consistent with 
their counterparts at the US-287 site for the limited distance investigated downstream of the passing 
lane.   

Statistical Analysis 

To examine the effect of distance downstream of the passing lane on platooning and performance, 
data from the US-287 site were further analyzed to get a better understanding of their association.  
Data from the US-191 site were not used in the statistical analysis due to the short downstream 
distance investigated by this study. Table 3 provides the coefficients of correlation among the three 
performance measures and all “platooning” variables, including the distance downstream of the 
passing lane, referred to as “distance” in the table. The percentage trucks refers to the percentage 
of heavy vehicles in the traffic stream.The merge effect refers to the effect of merge activity on 
headways and platooning that only exists at the data collection station immediately downstream 
of the passing lane. It is included in this analysis as an indicator (dummy) variable.  An indicator 
variable is one that takes the values 0 or 1 to indicate the absence or presence of some effect, in 
this case the merge activity, which may be expected to shift the outcome.  While the study site is 
generally located in level terrain, the exact percentage grade from as-built drawings at various data 
collection stations was used in the analysis.  Percent no passing in this study refers to the percentage 
of length of highway where passing is prohibited within one mile upstream of the data collection 
station.

Table 3:  Correlation Coefficients Between Performance Measures and Major Platooning  
 

Variables 

Performance Indicator Volume

US 287

% No 
Passing

Percent Followers
Follower Density

ATS/FFS

0.800
0.832
-0.744

-----
-----
-----

Distance Merge 
Effect
0.169
-----
0.104
-----
-0.248
0.145

Grade

-----
-----
-0.194

% 

Trucks
0.109
-----
-----

Note: Cells marked with “-----” refer to coefficient of correlation less than 0.1.

The results show that traffic volume has the highest correlation with performance measures 
(all  coefficients  are  above  0.74).    The  results  also  suggest  a  weak  correlation  among  the  three 
performance  measures  and  other  platooning  variables,  including  the  distance  downstream  of 
the  passing  lane.  Overall,  the  percent-no-passing  showed  the  lowest  correlations  with  the  three 
performance measures. All correlation coefficients exhibited logical relationships, i.e., platooning 
increases with the increase in traffic volume, grade, distance downstream of passing lane, percentage 
trucks, and the presence of merge effect.  

To get a closer look at the association between performance measures and distance downstream 
of the passing lane, it was deemed appropriate to control the effect of volume in the analysis.  As 
such,  the  analysis  of  correlations  was  repeated  using  data  that  roughly  reflects  the  same  traffic 
level.  The new data set only involves hourly volumes that are in the range 125 vph to 135 vph, 

64

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010
which constitute the majority of the observations.  At this traffic level, the correlation coefficients 
were  calculated  between  performance  measures  and  all  other  platooning  variables  as  shown  in 
Table 4. This time, the distance downstream of the passing lane showed relatively high correlations 
with performance measures as shown in this table (all coefficients are above 0.73).  All distance 
coefficients exhibited logical relationships with performance measures. Specifically, as the distance 
downstream of the passing lane increases, percent followers and follower density increase as well. 
On the other hand, as this distance increases, the ratio of average travel speed to the free-flow speed 
decreases. Only one illogical (and low) correlation coefficient was found between follower density 
and percent no-passing. What this tells us is that follower density was not reasonably sensitive to 
percent no-passing at this study site. In case studies where a specific site is investigated, it is likely 
to have an illogical weak correlation given the amount of field data used and the many variables that 
could affect the measure of interest.

Table 4:  Correlation Coefficients Between Performance Measures and Platooning Variables 
 

at Same Traffic Level  

US 287

Performance Indicator % No Passing

Distance

Percent Followers
Follower Density

ATS/FFS

-----

(-0.233)
-0.399

0.732
0.735
-0.94

Merge 
Effect
-----
0.139
0.711

Grade % Trucks

0.338
0.21
-0.68

0.189
0.197
0.579

Note:   Cells marked with “-----” refer to coefficient of correlation less than 0.1

Values in brackets are those that exhibited illogical relationships

Besides  correlation  coefficients,  multivariate  linear  regression,  another  tool  used  to  explore 
linear relationships, was also performed to examine the functional relationships between performance 
indicators and platooning variables with special emphasis on the distance downstream of the passing 
lane.  

Table 5 summarizes the results of the regression analysis, which show the relationship between 
the response variable (performance indicators) and predictor (platooning) variables.  Upon examining 
this table, the following observations can be made: 
1.  All three models are significant at the 95% confidence level as affirmed by the F-test results. 
2.  The coefficients of determination (R-square) are relatively high, which shows that much of the 
variation in the performance measures is explained by the respective models.  Traffic volume 
and distance downstream of the passing lane were found significant in all regression models.  
3.  This indicates that distance beyond the end of the passing lane has significant effect on all 
performance measures investigated in this study.  Merge effect and percent no-passing were 
found only significant in the model for estimating percent followers. 

4.  Grade was found insignificant in all regression models, which shows that it had no tangible 
effect on any of the performance measures. This is mainly due because the study site is located 
in generally level terrain and the amount of changes in grade among data collection stations 
was minimal.  

5.  All predictor variables that were found significant using the t-test exhibited logical relationships 

with the dependent variable.      

65

Passing Lane Operational Benefits
Table 5:  Results from Multivariate Linear Regression Analysis at Study Site US 287

US 287

Performance 

Indicator

Regression Model

P value
F-test1

R-

squared

SE

Coefficient and P-value from t-test2, 3
Dist Merge 

% 

Effect Grade

Volume % No 
Passing

Trucks

Percent Follower <0.001

0.74

2.66

0.0741
<0.001

0.0323
0.01

0.055
(0.09)

0.789
<0.001

3.42
<0.001

0.626
0.43

Follower Density <0.001

0.72

0.09

0.00023
<0.001

0.00002

0.76

-0.0154

0.92

0.0122
0.02

0.0877
(0.08)

-0.0081

0.76

ATS/FFS

<0.001

0.67

0.77

0.00008
<0.001

-0.0012

0.78

0.201
0.59

-0.174
<0.001

-0.048
0.20

-0.194
0.11

1 Values underlined in italic refer to models that were found significant using the F-test 
2 Values in bold are for coefficients that were found significant using the t-test 
3 Values in brackets are those that passed significance testing at the 90% confidence level only

To further examine the effect of distance on performance measures, another regression analysis 
was  conducted  where  all  variables  that  were  found  less  important  were  dropped  from  further 
analysis. This has narrowed the list of variables to traffic volume and distance downstream of the 
passing lane. To control for the effect of volume, only field data that roughly represents the same 
traffic level (125-135 vph) were used in the regression. This allowed dropping volume from the 
regression analysis leaving distance as the only predictor variable.

The objective is to answer the question: for a given traffic volume, what is the effect of distance 
on traffic performance and platooning?  The results are presented in Table 6.   Upon examining the 
F-test and t-test results, it is evident that the three models are significant at the 95% confidence level.  
Also, the only predictor variable, distance downstream of the passing lane, was found significant 
in all three models. The R-square values suggest that distance explained approximately 54% of the 
variation in percent followers and follower density and approximately 89% of the variation in the 
speed ratio. These results are generally consistent with those from the correlation analysis. 

Table 6:  Results from Multivariate Linear Regression Analysis with Distance as the Only 
 

Predictor Variable

Performance Indicator

Percent Follower

Follower Density

ATS/FFS (%)

F-test
<0.001

<0.001

<0.001

CONCLUDING REMARKS  

Regression Model

R-squared

0.536

0.540

0.887

SE
1.598

0.023

0.175

P-value from t-test

Distance
<0.001

<0.001

<0.001

Most studies in the literature either relied heavily on simulation or investigated a short distance 
downstream  of  the  passing  lane.    Therefore,  there  were  conflicting  findings  in  the  literature  in 
regards to the distance where the effect of the passing lane persists, also called the effective length 
of the passing lane. The current research utilized empirical data to investigate the effect of passing 

66

JTRF Volume 49 No. 3, Fall 2010
lanes on rural two-lane highways. Analyses were conducted to assess the operational benefits of 
passing lanes and how those benefits diminish as traffic moves away from the passing lane.  The 
major findings of this study are: 
1.  Using  headway-related  performance  measures,  platooning  level  decreases  beyond  the 
downstream end of the passing lane for a short distance before it starts to increase again as 
traffic  moves  away  from  the  passing  lane.    For  the  study  sites  investigated,  results  suggest 
that this distance could be as long as 1.5 miles beyond the end of passing lane taper.  This 
phenomenon is related to the merge activity at the end of the passing lane, which may force 
many drivers to accept headways shorter than what they would comfortably select.  This shows 
a limitation in using the headway-related performance measures as indicators of platooning and 
impedance on two-lane highways.    

2.  Despite the effect of the merge activity, the change in headway-related performance measures 
before and after the passing lane is notable in most instances and is a function of passing lane 
length and traffic level.  Changes in headway-related performance measures ranged between 
33% and 43% at the US-287 site versus 7% and 19% at the US-191 site.  The true improvement 
in performance caused by the passing lane is expected to exceed these values should the merge 
effect discussed earlier be considered.    

3.  Research results showed considerable residual operational benefits (around 30% reduction in 
platooning level) at 6.6 miles downstream of the passing lane at the US-287 study site.  This 
suggests that the passing lane operational benefits at this site may well persist for a few more 
miles beyond the distance investigated, and consequently the effective length is likely to be 
in the order of 10 miles (or even longer).  This finding may contradict other studies in the 
literature,  but  it  is  somewhat  consistent  with  the  value  of  the  passing  lane  effective  length 
provided in the current HCM.  Specifically, the HCM suggests that the passing lane benefits in 
breaking up platoons could persist for up to 13 miles depending on traffic volumes.  While this 
study could not examine platooning for such a long distance, the residual benefits at 6.6 miles 
suggest that such benefits may persist well beyond the distance investigated in this research.  
Given the many variables that could affect the passing lane effective length, the authors strongly 
recommend further empirical studies on passing lanes which consider other ranges of traffic volumes 
and passing lane lengths.  This will help to develop a better understanding of the operational benefits 
of passing lanes, which is critical in the proper planning and design of passing lanes on rural two-
lane highways.      

Acknowledgements

The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  financial  support  to  this  research  by  the  Western 
Transportation Institute of Montana State University.

References

Al-Kaisy, A. and S. Karjala. “Indicators of Performance on Two-Lane Rural Highways: An Empirical 
Investigation.” Transportation	Research	Record	2071, (2008): 87-97. 

Gattis, J., R. Bhave, and L. Duncan. “Alternating Passing Lane Length.” Transportation	Research	
Record	1961,	(2006): 16-23.

Harwood,  D.  and  C.  Hoban.    “Low  Cost  Methods  of  Operational  Improvements  on  Two-Lane 
Highways.”	Midwest Research Institute. Report No. FHWA/IP-87/2, 1987.

Harwood, D. and A. St. John. “Operational Effectiveness of Passing Lanes on Two Lane Highways.” 
Federal Highway Administration, Report No. FHWA/RD-86/195, 1986. 

67

Passing Lane Operational Benefits
Harwood, D. and A. St. John. “Passing Lanes and Other Operational Improvements on Two-Lane 
Highways.” Federal Highway Administration, Report No. FHWA-RD-85-028, 1985. 

May, A.  “Traffic  Performance  and  Design  of  Passing  Lanes.”  Transportation	 Research	 Record 
1303, (1991): 63-73.

Mutabazi, M., E. Russell, and R. Stokes. “Review of the Effectiveness, Location, Design, and Safety 
of Passing Lanes in Kansas.” Transportation	Research	Record	1658, (1999): 25-33. 

Taylor,  W.  and  M.  Jain.  “Warrants  for  Passing  Lanes.”  Transportation	 Research	 Record	 1303, 
(1991): 83-91.

Transportation Research Board. Highway	Capacity	Manual. Fourth Edition. TRB, National Research 
Council, Washington, D.C., 2000.

Van As, C. “The Development of an Analysis Method for the Determination of Level of Service on 
Two-Lane Undivided Highways in South Africa.” Project Summary. South African National Roads 
Agency, 2003.

Woolridge, M., C. Messer, B. Heard, S. Rughupathy, A. Parham, M. Brewer, and S. Lee. “Design 
Criteria for Improved Two-Lane Section (Super 2).” Texas Transportation Institute, Project Report 
0-4064, 2002. 

Dr. Ahmed Al-Kaisy	is	an	associate	professor	and	the	principal	transportation	faculty	member	in	
the	Department	of	Civil	Engineering	at	Montana	State	University.	He	is	also	program	manager	
for	the	Safety	and	Operations	Focus	Area	at	the	Western	Transportation	Institute	and	a	registered	
professional	engineer	in	the	state	of	Montana.	Dr.	Al-Kaisy	received	a	Ph.D.	degree	in	transportation	
engineering	from	Queen’s	University	in	Ontario,	Canada.			

Zachary Freedman	received	an	M.Sc.	degree	in	transportation	engineering	from	Montana	State	
University	 in	 2009,	 and	 a	 B.Sc.	 in	 civil	 engineering	 from	 the	 University	 of	 Utah	 in	 2007.	 His	
graduate	research	was	in	the	area	of	traffic	performance	on	two-lane	highways.	He	currently	works	
as	a	transportation	engineer	with	the	South	Dakota	Department	of	Transportation.	

68

