Horizontal Cooperation in Network Expansion: 
An Empirical Evaluation of Gas Transportation 
Networks
by Rafay Ishfaq, Mark Clark, and Uzma Raja

This research presents a coordination approach for the expansion of gas transportation networks to 
serve an increasing customer base. An empirical study of natural gas markets in the southeastern 
United  States  shows  that  horizontal  cooperation  among  transportation  service  providers  (i.e., 
pipeline	companies)	allows	for	expanding	the	gas	transportation	networks	efficiently	to	serve	new	
customers.	 The	 benefits	 of	 coordination	 are	 identified	 through	 key	 structural	 elements	 such	 as	
number and location of additional pipeline links, lower infrastructure expansion costs, and demand 
segmentation for the gas transportation service providers.

INTRODUCTION

The  significant  increase  in  demand  for  natural  gas  in  the  U.S.  industrial  sector  has  renewed  a 
strategic interest in gas transportation networks. The scope of gas supply chains and scale of logistics 
activities are expanding to ensure an efficient supply of gas to an increasing number of customers. 
There are a number of factors that contribute to the increase in demand, such as moderate prices 
of natural gas relative to coal, discovery of abundant sources of domestic (shale) natural gas, and 
higher operational efficiency of gas-based technologies. The increase in demand has encouraged 
major investments in developing gas production capacity in the United States. In 2011, 95% of the 
total natural gas consumed in the country was produced domestically (Barteau and Kota 2014).

One of the largest consumers of natural gas in the United States is the electric power industry. 
Not only because a majority of the new electric power generation units being installed in the United 
States are based on gas-fired technology, but many old coal-fired power plants are being converted to 
use natural gas (Lapides et al. 2011). The addition of new and retrofitted power plants has increased 
the demand for natural gas, which exceeded 9.1 trillion ft3 in 2012 (EIA 2013). The projected increase 
in the demand for natural gas has raised concerns about logistics and transportation capabilities of 
the existing gas distribution networks. Unlike other surface (road and rail) transportation modes, 
capacity in a distribution pipeline is already in use by existing customers. In this case, expanding 
transportation networks to connect additional customers to gas supply requires careful consideration 
and planning.

This  study  contributes  to  the  academic  literature  by  proposing  an  arrangement  for  network 
expansion  based  on  the  concept  of  horizontal  cooperation  among  competitors.  In  this  setting, 
gas pipeline companies, which otherwise compete with each other, cooperate to serve respective 
segments of the market through mutual agreement. In a situation where a sizeable new demand 
for natural gas would result in an aggressive competition among pipeline companies, a strategy 
based on cooperation may provide a better alternative that is beneficial for partnering firms as well 
as customers. The benefits of coordinated expansion of gas transportation networks are analyzed 
and discussed in relation to extant theory. To develop this understanding, the logic of industrial 
organization theory and concept of horizontal cooperation among competitors is used.

The paper shows that horizontal cooperation can yield lower expansion costs while providing 
equal business opportunity for participating firms. The dynamics of gas transportation are represented 
by  a  network  model,  which  also  incorporates  the  requirements  for  expanding  transportation 

59

JTRF Volume 54 No. 1, Spring 2015infrastructure. This model includes relevant supply-demand requirements, network expansion costs, 
gas transmission capacity, and elements of gas pipeline infrastructure. Real-world data from gas 
pipelines in the southeastern United States are used in an empirical evaluation of the existing gas 
transportation networks to identify key strategic issues concerning collaborative network expansion. 
The scenario where different pipeline companies compete for gas supply business in a new market 
is  compared  with  another  scenario  driven  by  the  horizontal  cooperation  approach.  The  results 
provide empirical evidence that cooperation not only results in an efficient expansion of the pipeline 
network to support the needs of new customers (power plants) but also provides equal opportunities 
for partners firms (gas transportation service providers) in the new market.

BACKGROUND

In the past, a major concern about adequate sources of gas supply existed due to the limited domestic 
natural gas reserves. As late as 2007, the United States was expected to be increasingly dependent 
on  imports  due  to  the  constrained  domestic  supply. As  new  technologies  of  horizontal  drilling 
and  hydraulic  fracturing  have  increased  domestic  gas  production,  reliance  on  gas  imports  is  no 
longer a major issue (Mouawad 2009; Yergin and Ineson 2009). According to the 2012 Annual 
Energy Outlook Report of the U.S. Department of Energy (EIA 2012), domestic shale gas supply 
is expected to increase from 10% of total gas production in 2010 to 49% by 2035, thus making 
domestic  production  of  natural  gas  greater  than  the  expected  national  demand.  The  domestic 
production capacity is estimated to satisfy demand for gas from large industrial users in the electric 
power generation industry (Paltsev et al. 2011).

The other key issue, which is relevant in this context, is the impact of federal environmental 
regulations. The electric power plants built in the U.S. had primarily used coal as a fuel in the 
combustion process to produce high pressure steam. Burning coal in this process releases greenhouse 
gases, which are harmful to the environment. To control the emission of greenhouse gases, the U.S. 
Congress passed new amendments to the 1963 Clean Air Act, which became effective January 1, 
2012. These regulations limit the hazardous air pollutants emitted by coal-fired electric power plants 
(EIA 2012). The electric power companies are required to bring these coal-fired power plants into 
regulatory compliance or face significant monetary penalties. One of the options available to power 
companies is installing scrubbers, which capture sulphur oxides from coal combustion and filter 
them into disposable matter. However, this additional step in power generation adds a significant 
capital and operating expense for power companies, affecting the cost per unit ($/kilowatt-hour) of 
generated electricity. The lower efficiency and higher maintenance costs of old coal-fired power 
plants  do  not  offer  an  economical  case  for  recovering  capital  investments  in  the  environmental 
retrofits (Shahidehpour et al. 2005). For these operational and financial reasons, power companies 
opted to replace coal-fired power plants with gas-fired technology, instead of installing environmental 
controls on the old coal-fired power plants (Lapides et al. 2011). The new power plants are typically 
built on the same sites as old coal-fired plants. The current sites are already connected to the national 
electric grid; they already have necessary approvals and permits for locating a power plant and the 
necessary human and infrastructure resources are in place.

The legislation enacted by the U.S. Congress, such as the Natural Gas Policy Act (1978) and 
Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act (1989), deregulated the natural gas industry. Issued in 1992, 
U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) Order No. 636 states that “pipelines must 
separate  their  transportation  and  sales  services,  so  that  all  pipeline  customers  have  a  choice  in 
selecting their gas sales, transportation, and storage services from any natural gas provider, in any 
quantity.” These legislative actions resulted in a competitive marketplace in which different players 
engage in the sales and purchase of transportation, storage, and distribution of natural gas.

The  transportation  of  natural  gas  from  a  gas  wellhead  to  the  customer  involves  multiple 
organizations. The  natural  gas  supply  chain  starts  at  its  upstream  end  with  gas  production. The 

60

Gas Transportation Networksuniqueness of the natural gas supply chain is that it consists of a single product. All production 
sources are required to process the gas extracted from underground sources to meet the quality 
standards of natural gas. The output of natural gas wells is collected through a network of gathering 
pipes  which  deliver  natural  gas  (with  its  impurities)  to  processing  plants. These  gas  processing 
plants bring natural gas to the required national quality standards.

The other key player in the gas supply chain is gas storage companies. These companies operate 
underground storage facilities (such as aquifers, caverns, and old gas wells) where natural gas can 
be stored. The gas is injected under pressure into these storage areas and later extracted, as needed. 
Storage facilities help absorb demand fluctuations during the year. A significant aspect of the storage 
facilities is these are natural underground areas that are very expensive to duplicate above the ground. 
Thus, from a supply chain design perspective, storage locations and capacity are usually fixed.

The gas supplied by producers is purchased by gas distributors and marketing companies. The 
distributors are typically gas utilities which service customers in large cities and municipalities. 
Natural gas is delivered to city gates by pipeline companies from where a distribution company 
takes  over  and  transports  the  gas  to  residential  and  commercial  customers.  Large  industrial 
customers such as electric power plants typically buy gas directly from the gas pipeline companies 
and gas marketers due to higher end-of-line pressure requirements. The available supply of natural 
gas  is  also  bought  and  sold  through  the  marketing  companies.  Marketers  provide  coordination 
services such as purchase, storage, transportation, and all intermediate steps required to facilitate 
the sale and delivery of natural gas. A key service offered by marketing companies is managing the 
transportation arrangements between different pipelines. When natural gas in one pipeline is to be 
delivered to a customer located on another pipeline, gas transportation hub operators are instructed 
by the marketing companies to make pressure adjustments to transfer gas through these pipelines.

To study the effects of an increase in gas demand from new power plants, a strategic review 
of the natural gas transportation networks is required at the national level. Such a review would 
make recommendations for installing new capacity on existing lines and/or building new interstate 
pipelines. However, an evaluation at such a level involves many players and stake holders, increasing 
the scope of work, which is beyond the focus of this study. This paper is focused on a regional 
context  and  transportation/supply  considerations  for  distribution  pipeline  firms.  The  empirical 
evaluation  presented  in  this  paper  is  focused  on  issues  related  to  connecting  new  users  (power 
plants) of natural gas to existing pipelines (under current capacity restrictions) and identifies the 
benefits of coordination in expanding gas transportation networks.

HORIZONTAL COOPERATION IN GAS TRANSPORTATION NETWORKS

The gas transportation network in the U.S. comprises more than 210 natural gas pipeline systems 
(EIA 2013). The 30 largest interstate pipelines transport about 80% of the total gas supply (EIA 
2013). In the gas transportation industry, new capacity is added only when there are new customers 
in the market, such as the electric power industry where many power plants are undergoing a change 
in fuel from coal to natural gas. These developments in the electric power industry have presented a 
significant business opportunity for pipeline companies to expand their revenue base.

Industrial organization theory in the field of strategic management describes the dependency that 
exists among competitor firms that leads to the formation of strategic groups (Harrigan 1985). The 
concept of strategic groups serves as a foundation for the idea proposed by Sollner and Rese (2001) 
in which firms that would otherwise compete with each other mutually agree to each serve a different 
segment of the market. In this context, firms may elect to serve narrowly defined customers (based 
on some criterion, such as cost-to-serve) and thereby not compete head-on with their competitors 
in the same market. A strategic group may include many firms or just one member (single pipeline 
company), with each firm following its individual strategy (Audy et al. 2012; Sollner and Rese 

61

JTRF Volume 54 No. 1, Spring 20152001). Formation of such groups protects its members from invasion by other competitors due to 
their relative cost position, among other factors (Caves and Porter 1977).

The concept of strategic groups can also be examined through a network of relationships among 
competitors (Zaheer et al. 2000). Bengtsson and Kock (1999) classified the nature of relationships 
among  competitors  into  four  different  types,  based  on  the  continuum  between  cooperation  and 
competition: coexistence (social and information exchange among partners, no economic exchange), 
cooperation  (business,  information,  and  social  exchange),  co-opetition  (partners  cooperate  in 
some ways and compete in others) and competition (a zero sum arrangement). According to this 
classification, competitors can coexist in a market by keeping their distance and avoiding interaction. 
When competing firms do interact, they try to reduce conflicts through cooperation. This situation 
arises when competitors have common goals (e.g., when pipeline companies decide to cooperate 
in  facilitating  gas  connectivity  to  power  plants  to  promote  use  of  natural  gas  in  electric  power 
generation). The cooperation among competitors does not necessarily mean they do not compete 
with  each  other.  Under  co-opetition,  competitors  can  cooperate  in  one  market,  such  as  power 
generation market, and compete in others, such as industrial and residential markets (Bengtsson and 
Kock 2000). In this paper, our focus is on cooperation among firms (pipeline companies), which 
operate at the same level in the gas supply chain, referred to as horizontal cooperation (Cruijssen et 
al. 2007b). Through close cooperation and joint planning, partner pipeline companies can increase 
the competitiveness of their gas transportation networks (Vanovermeire et al. 2013).

The existing literature in the area of horizontal cooperation in logistics has focused on issues 
related  to  pooling  of  transportation  resources,  leveraging  specific  strengths  and  capabilities  of 
the other participating firms, trading of complementary resources to achieve mutual gains, and to 
eliminate the high cost of duplication (Schmoltzi and Wallenburg 2011; Vanovermeire et al. 2013). 
Empirical research has indicated that horizontal cooperation can result in decreased cost, improved 
service, and protection of market position (Cruijssen et al. 2007c). According to Vos et al. (2002) 
synergies  from  cooperation  among  competitors  can  be  achieved  by  restructuring  transportation 
networks collectively by all partners. This approach was shown to yield benefits for all participant 
firms in the German consumer goods industry (Bahrami 2002). Cruijssen et al. (2007a) provided 
empirical evidence that horizontal cooperation provides cost savings for logistics service providers 
through joint planning of transportation routes. 

Horizontal  cooperation  uses  market  segmentation  based  on  two  characteristics:  how  well 
market needs align with the capabilities of individual partner firms, and that each market segment 
offers  an  equal  business  opportunity  to  partner  firms  (Krajewska  et  al.  2007; Audy  et  al.  2010; 
Vanovermeire et al. 2013). The gains resulting from horizontal cooperation are measured in the form 
of cost savings (through increased efficiency, economies-of scale, and joint purchase power) and 
revenue opportunities. In the context of this research, pipeline companies may jointly coordinate 
market segmentation to identify a group of customers to be served by each partner firm, based on 
network expansion costs. Such a cooperative arrangement should provide equal opportunity to all 
participants  for  generating  revenue. The  feasibility  of  such  an  arrangement  is  supported  by  the 
limited transportation capacity of gas pipelines, which does not allow pipeline firms to compete in 
all markets and serve all customers.

In the next section, a model is presented that represents the gas transportation networks through 
various structural elements such as footprint of existing pipelines, routing options for expanding the 
network, demand and supply requirements, and optimal routes for installing new pipes.

NETWORK MODEL OF GAS TRANSPORTATION

A gas transportation network can be represented by a model using a graph composed of a collection of 
nodes and links. The footprint of a pipeline is identified by links which pass through different nodes. 
The nodes represent geographical locations and facilities (demand points and branching stations). 

62

Gas Transportation NetworksAdditional  requirements,  such  as  transportation  capacity,  demand  and  supply  requirements,  and 
routing restrictions, can be added to the network model. The output of the model identifies optimal 
routing for installing new pipes and pressure stations, so that new demand nodes can be connected 
to supply nodes through the existing pipelines.

Earlier research has shown that optimal network configuration of gas pipelines has a tree-like 
structure (Rothfarb et al. 1970; Bhaskaran and Salzborn 1979). Thus, the minimum spanning tree 
approach provides a good basis for a mathematical model of gas transportation networks (Kawatra 
and  Bricker  2000).  The  network  model  used  in  this  paper  follows  this  approach  with  updates 
to  implement  the  network  expansion  requirements  specific  to  the  case  studied  here. The  model 
is  used  to  study  different  strategic  issues  related  to  pipeline  expansion,  i.e.,  which  existing  gas 
pipeline is most suitable to supply natural gas to the electric power plants, routing of pipes for the 
new pipelines, consideration for available gas capacity, and the location/size of new gas pressure 
regulation stations.

Unlike freight transportation and telecommunication networks, a design of gas pipeline networks 
has to consider additional issues such as gas pressures, flow rates, and pressure regulation (Martin 
et al. 2006). The literature on pipeline networks is generally focused on optimizing the routing of 
pipeline networks, selecting diameter of the pipes (related to transmission capacity), and location 
of pressure regulation stations (Zheng et al. 2010; Kabirian and Hemmati 2007). For expanding an 
existing gas pipeline network, a major area of interest is in selecting the segments of pipeline where 
reinforcements are added to satisfy increasing demand (Babonneau et al. 2012; Andre et al. 2009).
Due to long distances between the gas-wells and demand points, pressure regulation stations 
are widely used in transporting natural gas. The gas regulation stations provide pressure differential 
across a pipe to control the flow of gas. The pressure regulation is modeled in the form of inlet and 
outlet pressures on each arc in a network graph (Rios-Mercado et al. 2002). The inlet and outlet 
pressures across an arc determine the direction of gas flow. 

Modeling Framework

The network model used in this paper is based on a grid-based graph that represents a geographical 
region,  in  terms  of  nodes  and  links.  The  grid  is  useful  in  identifying  population  centers, 
environmentally protected land, and other right-of-way areas through which pipelines cannot pass. 
Such no-go areas are identified by disconnecting the corresponding nodes from the other nodes in 
the graph. The nodes in the graph are represented by N, which consists of nodes through which 
existing pipelines pass (represented by set P), nodes to represent the locations of power plants (set 
K), and nodes through which new pipes can be routed (set R). The node set P is further partitioned 
into  subsets,  represented  by  Pg,  where  each  subset  of  nodes  corresponds  to  different  pipelines 
(indexed by g). The connectivity within Pg is implemented by setting cij=0, for nodes i and j that are 
inter-connected. Otherwise, cij represents the unit cost of installing a new link between nodes i and j.
Each pipeline node (indexed by l) in subset Pg is characterized by its gas pressure (pounds per 
square inch), denoted by πl. The gas flow supply (ft3/day) available in a pipeline g is represented by 
кg. This parameter can be used to include additional gas supply in the future, as more shale gas fields 
are added to the supply network. The supply of natural gas to a power plant is needed at a specific 
pressure πk under the condition πk < πl. In order to meet these gas pressure requirements, pressure 
regulation may be needed. A pressure regulation station can be installed at a unit cost of γ per psi 
of gas pressure.

The supply of natural gas to a power plant requires laying new pipes. The model finds the 
lowest cost path by routing new pipes through available nodes to one of the existing gas pipelines. 
The demand-supply matrix D provides the details about the sources (gas pipelines) and demand 
(power plants) of gas supply. An element dik of matrixD of the supply-demand matrix represents a 
demand node (power plant) by -1, supply node (gas pipeline) by +1, and connector node by 0. Note 

63

JTRF Volume 54 No. 1, Spring 2015that for each power plant, there may be multiple sources of supply (pipelines). Hence each column 
of the demand-supply matrix will have a single -1 entry and multiple +1 entries.

 and 

There are three types of decision variables in the model. The decision variables 

 represent 
the binary choice of using link (i,j) for routing the new pipeline to supply natural gas to power plant 
k. Note that for two different power plants k and m, 
 variables may use the same link 
(i,j), especially if k and m are to be connected on the same branch of the new pipeline. To properly 
identify all the links on which new pipes will be installed, binary decision variables Yij are used. 
These variables properly identify the links on which new pipelines will be constructed, based on 
 variables. The decision variables Pl  represent the difference in gas pressure between what is 
the 
currently available at a gas pipeline node l and the pressure that is needed at the end-of-line power 
plant(s). If there is a pressure differential, additional pressure regulation capacity may need to be 
installed on the pipeline.

Sets:

G   = Existing gas pipelines; {1, 2 ... g}
Pg   = Nodes associated with gas pipeline g
K   = Nodes where new gas-fired electric power plants k are located
R   = Available nodes for new pipelines,
N   = Set of nodes
E   = Set of links  

Parameters:

cij   = Cost of installing new gas pipeline on link (i,j)
γ    = Cost to add unit pressure regulation (psi) at a gas pipeline node 
dik  = Natural gas supply-demand matrix 
кg    = Flow capacity of pipeline g 
αk   = Gas requirement at power plant  
πl  = Available gas pressure at pipeline node l
πk   = Gas pressure requirements at power plant k
M  = Large number

Decision Variables:

   = 1, if link (i,j) is needed to supply gas to plant k; 0 otherwise
Yij  = 1, if gas pipeline is constructed over link (i,j); 0 otherwise
Pl  = Pressure differential (psi) required at pipeline node l 

Model Formulation:

(1) 

Subject to:

(2)

(3)

(4)

64

Gas Transportation Networks(5)

(6) 

The objective function (1) represents the total expansion cost of the transportation network. The 
first term of the objective function deals with the total cost of installing new gas pipelines. The total 
cost of adding new or updating existing pressure regulation stations at pipeline node l is given by 
the second term, using decision variables Pl. The objective function is minimized over a number of 
constraints. Constraint (2) is used to find the lowest cost path from each power plant to one of the 
available pipelines for gas supply. For a given index i in constraint 2, index j in the two summations, 
is from two different instances of set E. Hence, node j marks the end of one link as well as the start 
of another link. These constraints consider multiple root-nodes where demand for plant k can be 
serviced. These root-nodes correspond to different supply pipelines. The links (pipes) are installed 
to service a power plant based on the smallest branch length to a root-node. If needed, multiple 
power plants can be connected together through tree-like paths. Constraint (3) is used to identify 
the links where new pipeline(s) will be constructed. A new pipeline cannot be installed to bridge 
(connect) two or more existing pipelines, as represented by constraint (4). Constraint (5) ensures that 
demand of natural gas from the newly constructed/retrofitted power plants to an existing pipeline 
does not exceed its available supply. In order to meet the gas pressure requirements of the power 
plants connected to the new pipelines, pressure in the supply pipelines may have to be adjusted. 
Constraint (6) determines the difference between available gas pressure (at different supply pipeline 
nodes) and gas pressure requirements at all the power plants connected to supply pipeline node l. 
The requirements of pressure regulation are determined by the largest pressure differential among 
all supply and demand points on a branch. Note that there may be some adjustments of gas pressure 
needed at delivery points for specific customers. However, in a model focused on network-level 
considerations, local operational details are not included.

The output of the model provides optimal routing of new pipes, which connect the demand 
points (power plants) to the most suitable supply point (gas pipeline) such that expansion costs 
of the new pipes and pressure stations are reduced while considering demand requirements and 
supply restrictions. This model is used to evaluate the differences between the uncoordinated and 
coordinated approaches for expanding the gas transportation networks. The differences are measured 
in terms of the expansion costs, which are based on routings of new pipes, supply and demand 
points in the network, and installation of pipes and pressure stations. The benefits of horizontal 
cooperation in network expansion are explored through a study of gas pipelines and power plants in 
the southeastern U.S. region.

SOUTHEASTERN U.S. GAS PIPELINE ENTWORK

This section presents a study to analyze key issues related to pipeline expansion in order to serve the 
demand from the new gas-fired power plants in the southeastern United States. The study considers 
three major interstate pipelines in the region; Southern Natural Gas, Transco, and Kinder Morgan. 
Kinder Morgan pipeline originates from three locations in southern Louisiana and southern Texas, 
converging around Nashville, TN. From there the pipelines travel through Kentucky and then on 
through Ohio to Boston and New York. Southern Natural consists of two main lines through the 
southeast region, one of which originates in southern Louisiana and the other originating in northern 
Louisiana.  Both lines pass through Mississippi and Alabama, and terminate in Georgia. Transco is 
the third major pipeline that runs through the southeast region.  It originates in southern Texas and 

65

JTRF Volume 54 No. 1, Spring 2015terminates in the State of New York, passing through Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina, 
before reaching New York. These pipelines are identified in Figure 1 as Pipeline 1 (Kinder Morgan), 
Pipeline 2 (Southern Natural), and Pipeline 3 (Transco).

The geographical area of this study is represented by a graph (Figure 1), which comprises 400 
nodes on a 20x20 grid where vertical (horizontal) distance between two nodes represents 50 miles 
(diagonal distance is 70 miles), covering a total area of one million square miles. The study includes 
30 nodes, which represent new gas-fired power plants, and 103 nodes, which represent the existing 
gas  pipelines.  The  power  plant  and 
Figure 1: Gas Pipelines and Power Plants
pipeline  nodes  are  inter-connected 
through  a  set  of  1,484  horizontal, 
vertical,  and  diagonal  arcs.  These 
arcs are used to route new pipes from 
existing  gas  pipelines  to  new  gas-
fired power plants.

this  study  operate 

coal-fired  power  plants 
The 
included 
in 
in 
Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, Kentucky, 
South  Carolina,  and  North  Carolina, 
each with a power generation capacity 
larger  than  600MW.  There  are  30 
such  plants  in  these  six  states  with 
an average size of 1,581 MW.  The 
smallest is 601 MW and the largest 
plant is 3,564 MW.  The data on each 
power  plant  (location,  year  built, 
power  generation  capacity,  current 
financial 
liabilities,  and  carbon 
costs)  were  extracted  from  the  U.S. 
Energy  Information  Administration 
(EIA) and industry databases related to the energy industry (Table 1). In Figure 1, power plants are 
identified by their ID in Table 1.

The cost of installing a new gas pipeline link is set at $1 million per mile (INGA 2009). The 
demand for natural gas at the electric power plant is calculated using the estimates provided by EIA, 
i.e., 0.00789 MCF of gas is used per KWh of generated electrical energy (EIA 2013). The supply 
nodes (gas pipelines) can provide gas pressures that range between 900 psi and 1100 psi, while 
the pressure requirements at the power plants range between 400 psi and 600 psi (Kabirian and 
Hemmati 2007). The data about gas supply capacity in the three pipelines were obtained from the 
respective gas companies: P1 – 106 MMCF/day, P2 – 25,000 MMCF/day, and P3 – 25,000 MMCF/
day.

66

Gas Transportation NetworksTable 1: Power Plants

     

Plant
ID
32
94
95
117
152
173
195
255
275
46
103
104
141
181
184
242
288
326
327
328
365
313
353
394
29
48
108
168
188
227

           

Location
(State)

AL
AL
AL
AL
GA
GA
GA
GA
GA
KY
KY
KY
KY
KY
KY
KY
NC
NC
NC
NC
NC
SC
SC
SC
TN
TN
TN
TN
TN
TN

Plant Name

Colbert
Gorgas
Miller
Gaston
Hammond
Bowen
Yates
Scherer
Harllee Branch
Paradise
Cane Run
Mill Creek
Ghent
H L Spurlock
E.W.Brown
Big Sandy
Cliffside
Marshall
Riverbend
GG Allen
Belews Creek
Urquhart
Wateree
Williams
Johnsonville
Cumberland
Gallatin
Kingston
Bull Run
John Sevier

Generation
Capacity
(MW)
1250
1417
2822
2013
953
3499
1487
3564
1746
2558
654
1717
2226
1279
739
1233
780
1996
601
1155
2160
650
685
633
1485
2600
1255
1700
950
800

Natural Gas

Demand
(MMCF)

342
387
771
550
260
956
406
974
477
699
179
469
608
350
202
337
213
546
164
316
590
178
187
173
406
711
343
465
260
219

Natural Gas

Pressure

(psi)
579
558
644
652
520
662
553
523
647
571
571
604
592
503
623
669
477
630
566
621
625
469
505
588
580
502
652
669
472
494

RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

To study the effect of coordination in expanding gas transportation networks, model (P) was used 
with data in two main scenarios. In the first scenario, a coordinated expansion of gas transportation 
networks was undertaken to identify a pipeline (among all candidate pipelines) which will serve a 
specific power plant. Since expansion of a pipeline network represents a significant portion of the 
cost of developing the capability to serve customers, it follows that a successful firm would be the 

67

JTRF Volume 54 No. 1, Spring 2015one that can serve customers with lowest network expansion costs. We use this setting to select 
which pipeline will service a specific power plant based on the lowest total transportation network 
expansion costs. The second scenario is based on connecting power plants to the network of each 
pipeline company, separately. This setting corresponds to the uncoordinated expansion of the gas 
transportation network. Note: A pipeline firm may choose to serve all or a part of the market. Our 
intent in using the two alternative scenarios is for the purpose of comparison. 

The model and corresponding data was coded into AMPL, which integrates a modeling language 
for describing optimization data, variables, objectives, and constraints (Fourer, Gay and Kernighan 
2002).  The  model  was  solved  to  optimality  using  CPLEX  12.4  solver  for  linear  mathematical 
programming  models. The  outputs  of  the  model  from  both  scenarios  were  compiled  to  provide 
information about: (i) which pipeline is most suitable for supplying natural gas to power plants based 
on the pipe installation costs and available gas supply, (ii) number and location of new branches 
added to the existing pipelines, (iii) new pipe links installed, and (iv) power plants allocated to 
each supply pipeline for service. The outputs of these scenarios were compared using key structural 
elements such as number and location of new links, expansion costs, and the allocation of power 
plants to gas pipelines for service. The best option is characterized as one that adds the least number 
of new branches with fewest pipes added to the network, and one that will need the smallest pressure 
differential between supply pipelines and power plants. These choices lead to a least cost expansion 
of the gas transportation network. 

The solution of the model in AMPL identifies the links that are used for installing gas pipes to 
service each power plant. These links were identified by the start and end nodes (indexed by i and 
j in the model). This information was recorded for each pipeline and power plant in the case study. 
For each pipeline, the number and location of pressure regulation stations were also recorded. The 
scale used in the grid to represent the network graph was used to calculate the length of new pipe 
links. These detailed outputs were compiled into summary tables, which are discussed below.

The  summary  output  of  the  first  scenario  is  presented  in Tables  2  and  3. The  results  show 
that in a coordinated expansion of the gas transportation network, each pipeline serviced a similar 
proportion of natural gas demand in the case study, e.g., pipelines P1 and P3 serviced 31% and 
26% of the total gas demand, respectively (see last column in Table 2). Thirty-three percent of 
the power plants were connected through pipeline P1, 40% were connected through P2, and 27% 
were connected through pipeline P3. The significance of this result is related to the concern that by 
participating in collaborative planning, pipeline companies lose the opportunity to capture market 
share and that some participants will be at a disadvantage in this arrangement. As the results show 
that for the southeastern region, the footprint of pipeline networks and the geographical dispersion 
of customers (power plants) allow participant pipeline companies to share a similar proportion of 
business opportunities in the new market.

68

Gas Transportation NetworksTable 2: Pipeline - Power Plant Allocations

Plant Name (ID) 
Colbert (32)    

Paradise (46)

Cane Run (103)
Mill Creek (104)
Ghent (141)
H L Spurlock (181)
E.W.Brown (184)
Big Sandy (242)
Johnsonville (29)
Cumberland (48)

Location    

Plant Name 

(ID)

Location      

AL

KY

KY
KY
KY
KY
KY
KY
TN
TN

Gorgas

Miller

Gaston
Hammond
Bowen
Scherer
Marshall
Riverbend
Gallatin
Kingston
Bull Run
John Sevier

AL

AL

AL
GA
GA
GA
NC
NC
TN
TN
TN
TN

Plant Name 

(ID)

Yates
Harllee 
Branch
Cliffside
GG Allen
Belews Creek
Urquhart
Wateree
Williams

 Location

GA

GA

NC
NC
NC
SC
SC
SC

Additional  outputs  of  this  scenario  are  shown  in Table  3. The  analysis  shows  that  network 
expansion (and related costs) for each pipeline depends on its existing footprint. While pipelines 
P1 and P3 served new customers with about the same total natural gas demand (i.e., 31% and 26%, 
respectively), each pipeline’s costs for installing new pipes was different. Pipeline P1 added 16 new 
links with a total length of 920 miles. Whereas, for a similar number of customers and gas demand, 
pipeline P3 needed 28 new links (75% more links that P1) for a total length of 1,520 miles. For 
pipeline P1, this level of expansion accounts for a significant increase (about double the length) 
compared with 630 miles of existing pipeline in the area (Kinder Morgan 2014).

Table 3: Summary Statistics of Expanded Pipeline Network

         

Pipelines

P1
P2
P3

Plants
Served
33%
40%
27%

New Pressure

Stations

New
Links

Length of
New Pipes

Gas Demand

Serviced (MMCF)

8
8
2

16
18
28

920 mi
980 mi
1520 mi

31%
43%
26%

These  results  identify  a  potential  shortfall  for  pipeline  companies  which  view  the  network 
expansion decision myopically. The potential to capture a large share of the market is tempting until 
the reality of cost-to-serve is considered in the analysis. These results show that for some pipeline 
companies, the cost of expanding their current pipeline network may come at a prohibitively high 
cost. Conversely, a pipeline may have a footprint in a region that allows it to efficiently expand its 
services to new customers. Such is the case with the pipeline network of Southern Natural (Pipeline 
P2), which has an existing network footprint in the region that is well-suited for providing access 
to the power plants within the region. The pipeline P2 is allocated 40% of all the new customers in 
the study (most among all the pipelines), which account for 43% of all the demand from the new 
gas-fired power plants. These power plants are connected through 18 new pipe links (29% of all new 
links installed) with eight pressure regulation stations (same as pipeline P1). The total length of new 
pipes added to pipeline P2 (980 miles, see Table 3) accounts for a 29.8% increase to the existing 

69

JTRF Volume 54 No. 1, Spring 20153,300 miles length of pipeline P2 in the region. This is the smallest percentage increase for a pipeline 
in the case study, and yet it covers the largest proportion (43%) of new demand.

Next, network model (P) is used in the uncoordinated case. Recall that in this setting, each 
pipeline company is considered individually to satisfy the demand from all power plants. The network 
model in this scenario identifies the optimal expansion of each pipeline’s network, exclusively. The 
output of the model identifies the layout and routing of the new pipes in the expanded network 
of  each  pipeline. The  output  of  the  model  for  each  pipeline  is  shown  in Table  4.  Note  that  for 
comparison, output of the previous scenario (coordinated expansion) is listed as base case.

Table 4: Comparison of Pipeline Networks

 Base Case 

 Case: P1 

 Case: P2 

 Case: P3 

Network Expansion Costs ($M)  
Pipe Installation 
Pressure Regulation   
Total

Number of new branches 
Plants serviced per branch (Avg.)
Number of new links          
Length of new pipes (miles)  

2,060
549
2,609
15
1.75
41
3,420

3,960
363
4,323
8
4.14
66
3,960

3,710
419
4,129
13
2.15
59
3,310

4,910
237
5,147
4
7.5
81
4,610

In the case of pipeline P1, all customers were connected by adding 66 new links (61% more 
links  than  base  case).  The  new  branches  added  to  the  original  pipelines  connect  through  eight 
locations, where half of these locations were different from the base case. The number of power 
plants serviced on each branch averaged 4.14, which is almost 2.5 times higher than the base case. 
This shows that pipeline P1’s network requires a lot more dense expansion than the base case. The 
costs of installing new pipes on pipeline P1 were very high (92.2% compared with base case). In the 
case of pipeline P2, only two of the branch locations were common with the base case. Compared 
with pipeline P1, P2 used a higher number of branches (62% more) and a smaller number of power 
plants serviced by each branch. While the average number of plants on a branch (Avg. = 2.15) was 
still higher than the base case, pipeline P2 needed (44%) more pipe links to provide access to its 
customers. This caused the expansion costs of pipeline P2 to be much higher than the base case.

These results show that in expanding a pipeline network with an extensive footprint (such as 
pipeline P2), power plants were connected separately on a branch from the supply pipeline. When 
the pipeline network is not as extensive (as in the case of Pipeline P1), multiple power plants were 
connected together for service within a single branch. This observation was verified in the case of 
pipeline P3 (see Table 4). The data provided by the pipeline companies for this case study show that 
pipeline P3 has the sparsest network in the southeastern region. The result of the scenario identified 
that 81 new pipe links will be needed to connect all customers (power plants), which would add 
4,610 miles to the existing network. The total expansion cost in the case of pipeline P3 was the 
highest among all the pipelines. However, there were only four new branches used by P3 to service 
power plants, with an average of 7.5 power plants served per branch. This is the highest number of 
power plants per branch among all the pipelines, increasing the utilization of the newly installed 
pipes. 

The analysis presented above is based on the evaluation of gas pipeline networks to provide 
connectivity  and  service  demand  of  all  power  plants.  In  this  context,  the  results  of  the  study 
has  identified  collaborative  planning  as  the  best  approach  toward  expanding  gas  transportation 
networks. However, the power plants in question may have their own dynamics in terms of when a 

70

Gas Transportation Networkspower plant may decide to switch fuel and its demand of natural gas becomes active. This situation 
introduces a time-based dimension to the pipeline expansion decisions. In this situation, the benefits 
of coordinated network expansion may be affected. For the purpose of this study, the timed-demand 
of natural gas for the coal-fired power plants in the region was evaluated based on the operational, 
financial, and environmental credentials of each power plant. This evaluation is made to identify the 
time when demand for natural gas at each power plant will be active. Note that this is an experimental 
evaluation, as the timing information about when demand of gas for a power plant will be active is 
not publicly available.

Figure 2: Timing of Natural Gas Demand

For this part of the study, three time periods were considered (each period was set equal to 
four years, which is similar to the time frame involved in replacing an existing power plant and 
building a gas pipeline). The timed-demand of each power plant is determined by considering the 
fixed  (capital)  and  variable  (operational) 
costs.  The  fixed  costs  included  in  the 
evaluation  are  replacement  cost  of  a  new 
gas-fired plant and a power plant’s current 
financial liabilities. The replacement costs 
are  assumed  to  increases  in  each  future 
time period at the rate of 10% annually, and 
the financial liabilities decrease at the same 
rate in the future time periods. The variable 
costs considered in the evaluation are fuel 
costs  (coal  and  natural  gas)  and  carbon 
emission  costs.  The  data  and  information 
related  to  this  evaluation  were  obtained 
from  power  company  websites,  energy 
council  reports,  and  government  agencies 
such as EIA and Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA). To identify the time when 
gas  demand  of  each  power  plant  may 
become active, total costs were computed 
for  the  following  four  options:  (a)  coal-
fired plant is replaced in t=1, (b) replaced in t=2, (c) replaced in t=3, and (d) fuel in the plant is not 
replaced. For each of these options, fixed and variable costs were used to calculate the total costs 
of each option. Based on these calculations, a time period is identified when switching fuel will 
result in the lowest total cost over the entire planning horizon. The result of this evaluation is shown 
in Figure 2. Each power plant is color coded (white, grey, and black) to identify the time period 
when its time-demand is activated. Note that while this evaluation is experimental and actual timed-
demand may have a different pattern, this setting allows us to investigate the effect of timed-demand 
on the benefits of using the coordinated network expansion approach.

The network model was used to obtain optimal (expanded) network structure in each planning 
period separately. In each case (time period), pipelines that provide the lowest cost connection to the 
demand-active power plants were selected. This selection was made while evaluating all candidate 
pipelines, similar to the approach used in the previously considered coordinated expansion scenario. 
The  output  from  the  timed-demand  case  is  compared  with  the  case  of  coordinated  expansion 
(referred to as the base case) in Table 5. This comparison showed that demand timing adversely 
affected the total expansion costs. The results show that by spreading demand across different time 
periods, more branches were installed to provide access to power plants. This setting did not offer 
the same economies of scale as were realized in the case of pooled demand. A branch installed 
for servicing customers in a specific time period had no capacity left over for customers that may 
need supply beyond the time frame when a pipeline was extended. This limitation resulted in using 

71

JTRF Volume 54 No. 1, Spring 2015