Identifying Traffic Safety Practices and Needs 
of Local Transportation and Law Enforcement 
Agencies
by Kirolos Haleem, Albert Gan, Priyanka Alluri, and Dibakar Saha

As	part	of	the	effort	to	implement	the	Strategic	Highway	Safety	Plan	(SHSP),	state	departments	
of	 transportation	 are	 looking	 to	 reach	 out	 to	 local	 and	 law	 enforcement	 agencies.	 This	 paper	
presents	 a	 study	 by	 the	 Florida	 Department	 of	 Transportation	 (FDOT)	 to	 identify	 the	 existing	
safety	practices	and	needs	of	local	transportation	agencies	and	law	enforcement	offices	in	Florida.	
Two	comprehensive	online	surveys	targeting	local	transportation	agencies	and	law	enforcement	
agencies	 are	 developed.	 The	 survey	 for	 local	 transportation	 agencies	 includes	 39	 questions	
on	 topics	 including	 standardization	 of	 crash	 analysis	 methods,	 training	 needs,	 and	 working	
with	FDOT.	For	law	enforcement	agencies,	the	survey	includes	25	questions	covering	topics	on	
enforcement	locations,	traffic	violations	and	safety	campaigns,	use	of	crash	reports,	and	working	
with	transportation	agencies.	Results	from	both	surveys	and	lessons	learned	are	discussed.	

INTRODUCTION

A Strategic Highway Safety Plan (SHSP 2013) is required under the Safe Accountable Flexible 
Efficient  Transportation  Equity Act  – A  Legacy  for  Users  (SAFETEA-LU  2005)  as  part  of  the 
Highway Safety Improvement Program (HSIP 2013). The plan aims to provide a comprehensive 
framework for reducing highway fatalities and serious injuries on all public roads by integrating the 
four E’s of highway safety: engineering, education, enforcement, and emergency medical services 
(EMS). The framework allows highway safety programs and partners in a state to work together in 
an effort to align goals, leverage resources, and collectively address the state’s safety challenges. 
The Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century (MAP-21 2013) continues the HSIP role as a 
core federal-aid program and requires states to develop, implement, evaluate, and update SHSP. As 
part of the effort to implement SHSP, state departments of transportation (DOTs) are increasingly 
looking to reach out to local and law enforcement agencies. 

This paper describes an effort by the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) to identify 
the  existing  safety  practices  and  needs  of  local  transportation  agencies  and  law  enforcement 
offices in Florida. As local roads make up a large percentage of a state road network system, local 
transportation agencies play an important role in the state’s overall safety performance. Working 
with these  agencies, knowing  their needs, and helping them meet their needs are critical to the 
success  of  the  SHSP  implementation.  While  local  transportation  and  law  enforcement  agencies 
both aim to improve traffic safety, their approaches and needs are different (Gan et al. 2012). For 
example, a law enforcement officer may be more interested in identifying enforcement locations 
based on crash frequency over a shorter period (e.g., three months), while a safety engineer uses 
multiple years of crash data and exposure to prioritize locations for safety improvements.

As part of the study, two online surveys were conducted targeting local transportation agencies 
and the law enforcement community to identify their practices and needs. While the surveys were 
rather comprehensive in scope, including 39 questions for local transportation agencies and 25 
questions for law enforcement agencies, this paper covers only those that are more likely to be 
of interest to the general readers. The surveys are easily transferable to other state DOTs that are 
willing to reach out to their local agencies.

83

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014LITERATURE REVIEW

As part of the survey design effort, a literature search was first conducted to identify relevant studies. 
It was found that studies that investigated traffic safety procedures and needs from the perspective 
of local transportation agencies and law enforcement officers were very limited. The majority of 
studies targeting law enforcement officers were found to focus on addressing data quality issues in 
crash reporting (Knezek and Hansen 2007, Bailey and Huft 2008, Mickee 2008), a better allocation 
of  traffic  safety  personnel  (Coffman  and  Monsere  2006),  the  impact  of  law  enforcement  on 
prohibiting hand-held cell phone use while driving (Nikolaev et al. 2010), and the officers’ attitudes 
and  problems  encountered  in  enforcement  (Hurst  1980,  Jonah  et  al.  1999,  Schrock  et  al.  2002, 
Chang and Shih 2012). For example, Knezek and Hansen (2007) designed the “Police Technical 
Assistance Program” for supporting the New Jersey Department of Transportation safety mission. 
As part of this program, assessments were conducted and technical assistance provided to reduce 
the reporting errors on New Jersey’s crash reports. The project succeeded in changing the structure 
of the crash reporting form that was accepted by municipal law enforcement officers. 

Mickee  (2008)  designed  a  law  enforcement  outreach  survey  to  explore  the  data  quality 
issues provided by law enforcement officers and to identify possible cost-effective solutions for 
the  problematic  lack  of  unreliable  crash  data  in  Massachusetts.  Mickee  (2008)  emphasized  two 
important criteria for a proper design of online surveys: surveys should have easy questions that 
could be answered in approximately 20 minutes and surveys should avoid open-ended questions as 
much as possible. Nikolaev et al. (2010) evaluated the impact of law enforcement on prohibiting cell 
phone use while driving in New York. They observed lower fatality crash rates after enforcement on 
banning cell phone use compared with crash rates before banning.

Studies  targeting  transportation  agencies  were  limited  compared  with  those  targeting  law 
enforcement agencies. Studies targeting transportation agencies focused mainly on methods to collect 
standard roadside information (Lee and Mannering 1999), perspective on various transportation 
modeling packages (Boile and Ozbay 2005), and opinions on potential benefits from technological 
innovations, e.g., electronic data entry and geographic information systems (GIS) (Cherry et al. 
2006). 

Lee and Mannering (1999) developed a standardized method to collect roadside information 
and estimate accident severity likelihood resulting from roadside attributes. The authors conducted 
a national survey of DOT agencies in the U.S. to investigate various states’ practices regarding the 
collection of roadside information. The majority of responses agreed that the removal of unnecessary 
fixed objects along the roadside was essential, more so than relocation. Boile and Ozbay (2005) 
conducted a survey to obtain the perspective of different software users regarding the strengths and 
limitations of the most widely used transportation modeling packages. They illustrated that there 
was an increasing demand for sound graphical interface, GIS integration, and land use integration 
packages,  as  found  in  TransCAD  and  CUBE.  Thus,  the  current  study  is  considered  the  first  to 
identify the existing safety practices and needs of local transportation agencies and law enforcement 
offices as part of the effort to implement the SHSP. 

SURVEY DESIGN AND ADMINISTRATION 

To  identify  the  existing  safety  practices  and  needs  of  local  transportation  agencies  and  law 
enforcement offices, two separate online surveys targeting local transportation agencies and law 
enforcement  offices  were  designed.  Local  transportation  agencies  include  both  county  and  city 
public  works  departments.  Each  county  public  works  department  constructs  and  maintains  the 
county’s  roads,  bridges,  canals,  sidewalks,  street  signs,  pavement  markings,  traffic  signals,  and 
storm-water  drainage  facilities.  The  city  public  works  department  maintains  and  improves  the 
city’s infrastructure by conducting reviews for plans submitted by the involved county and FDOT. 

84

Traffic Safety PracticesBoth  departments  have  safety-related  responsibilities  as  part  of  their  work.  For  example,  local 
county agencies rely on police crash reports to identify problematic (i.e., high crash) locations at 
intersections and corridors based on various crash types. Afterward, they adopt countermeasures as 
recommended by FDOT and National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) reports. 
Local city departments address traffic safety issues and rely on police reports to identify problematic 
locations within the borders of the city.

Law enforcement offices have police officers who complete crash reports for every crash. Law 
enforcement officers deal with traffic safety problems while stressing education and enforcement. 
For example, they initiate safety programs to alert drivers of potential crash risk, e.g., DON’T TEXT 
AND DRIVE, and they use speed trailers (i.e., devices that visually display drivers’ real-time speeds 
compared to the speed limit) to enforce speeding violations. Law enforcement officers could also 
perform crash analysis to assist in their enforcement campaigns by prioritizing the most hazardous 
intersections with specific safety issues, e.g., speeding, pedestrian crashes, and bicyclist crashes.

According to previous studies, e.g., Mickee (2008), online surveys are preferred for opinionated 
questionnaires for their cost-efficiency. A comprehensive list of questions in both surveys has been 
prepared while taking into consideration the criteria provided by Mickee (2008) for designing online 
survey questions. The list was further shortened to fit the planned completion time of 30 minutes 
for the local transportation agencies survey and 20 minutes for the law enforcement offices survey. 
The research team then went through each question with the FDOT project manager from the State 
Safety Office. The surveys were distributed in the fall of 2011. 

To  initiate  a  perspective  about  the  adopted  safety  analysis  procedures,  on-site  visits  to  two 
local transportation agencies in the South Florida region were conducted, which were the Miami-
Dade and Broward Counties’ Public Works Departments. These two agencies were selected on the 
basis of: (1) conducting traffic safety analysis as part of their duties and (2) being located in the 
South Florida region to be close to Florida International University. Face-to-face interaction with 
the traffic safety engineers in both agencies helped to fine-tune the survey questions. In addition, the 
two surveys were pretested by sending out the survey links to several graduate students to ensure 
that the survey instrument worked as intended.

The survey of local transportation agencies was comprehensive, including 39 questions covering 

the following eight areas of interest: 

training

identification of high crash locations

1.  use of crash data 
2. 
3.  project selection, implementation, and evaluation
4.  crash analysis software systems
5.  crash analysis standardization
6.  crash analysis documentation 
7. 
8.  working with FDOT
An invitation email along with a link to the survey questions was sent out to a broad list of 
local county and city transportation agencies in Florida using the Safety Office Emailing System. 
Reminder emails were sent to non-responding recipients. A total of 37 responses were received and 
the responding agencies were geographically diverse, covering the entire state, including five from 
Northern Florida, 12 from Southern Florida, five from Eastern Florida, seven from Western Florida, 
and eight from Central Florida. In addition, the agencies represented both rural and urban regions, 
where the northern region is mostly rural.

The survey targeting law enforcement agencies included 25 questions covering the following 

four areas of interest: 

a. 
b. 

selection of enforcement locations,
traffic violations and safety campaigns,

85

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014c.  crash reports, and 
d.  working with local transportation agencies. 
The  State  Safety  Office  also  assisted  in  sending  out  the  law  enforcement  agencies  survey 
through  each  District  Community  Traffic  Safety  Team  (CTST)  coordinator.  Florida  CTSTs  are 
groups of highway safety advocates who are committed to solving safety problems through a multi-
disciplinary approach. The CTST individuals represent each of the four E’s and consist of local 
city, county, state, and private industry representatives, as well as local citizens. Each FDOT district 
has a CTST coordinator who works closely with the CTSTs in their jurisdiction. The survey was 
sent out through each district CTST coordinator to a broad list of local law enforcement agencies. 
Furthermore, to increase the response rate, multiple reminder emails were sent to non-responding 
recipients.

In total, 46 law enforcement agencies responded to the survey. The responding agencies were 
classified as 30 county sheriff offices, 14 city and university police departments, and two district 
offices of the Florida Highway Patrol (FHP). Of the 46 responding agencies, 13 were from Northern 
Florida, seven were from Southern Florida, 14 were from Eastern Florida, seven were from Western 
Florida, and five were from Central Florida. Again, the responding agencies were well represented 
and included different spatially-diverse agencies from across the five geographic regions of Florida. 
In addition to sending the invitation email, follow-ups were performed to obtain clarifications on 
some of the responses. 

A  precise  response  rate  for  each  survey  could  not  be  calculated. The  surveys  attempted  to 
reach out to as many agencies as possible by making use of existing mailing lists (i.e., the Safety 
Office Emailing System for distributing the local transportation agencies survey and the assistance 
of each district CTST coordinator for distributing the law enforcement agencies survey). The precise 
number of subscriptions in these mailing lists could not be determined as the number of emails in 
these lists was not made known to the research team. In addition, it is expected that these mailing 
lists, like any others, are likely to contain a number of invalid emails.

LOCAL TRANSPORTATION AGENCY SURVEY RESULTS 

While the number and type of crashes are readily available, the objectives of the study could only 
be accomplished through the expert opinions of traffic safety professionals. The survey results for 
four select areas from the 37 local transportation agencies are summarized in the sections below.

Crash Analysis Standardization

Uniformity of Crash Analysis Methods and Procedures. Local transportation agencies have been 
using several crash analysis software tools. Some tools that were developed in-house include the 
Accident Reporting System (ARS), a crash mapping system, and other GIS crash analysis systems.
Identifying the opinions of local transportation agencies about the uniformity of crash analysis 
methods could help determine the feasibility for statewide standardization of crash analysis methods. 
As shown in Figure 1(a), over 70% of responding local agencies either agreed or strongly agreed to 
standardize crash analysis procedures across the state. Close to 25% of the agencies were neutral, 
while a minority (5%) opposed standardization. It can be inferred that there was a general consensus 
on standardizing crash analysis methods and procedures across Florida. Important reasons justifying 
standardization included: 

•	 Standardization would be beneficial when applying for grants.
•	 Standardization results in consistent, predictable, and repeatable results.
•	 Standardization provides cost effectiveness.
•	 Standardization protects analysts from potential liabilities.

86

Traffic Safety Practicesprocess:

On the other hand, the following were some of the opinions that discouraged the standardization 

It is difficult for all agencies to have access to the same data.

•	
•	 There is too much inconsistency between agencies. 
•	 The same methods and procedures might be very expensive for rural counties compared 

with urban counties.

•	 A standard method might not work well for all types of safety issues, e.g., fatal crashes.

Adoption of the Highway Safety Manual as Standard for Crash Analysis. The Highway Safety 
Manual (HSM) (AASHTO 2010a), released in July 2010, provides analytical tools for quantifying 
effects of potential changes at individual sites. Although the manual is in the initial stages of its 
adoption, states and local agencies are looking for ways to implement it. The respondents were 
provided a link in the survey to the HSM homepage to learn more about the manual. As shown in 
Figure 1(b), about 46% of responding local agencies either agreed or strongly agreed to adopt the 
HSM as a standard for crash analysis, 43% were neutral, while the rest (11%) opposed adopting the 
manual. 

Some responding agencies indicated that they support the HSM adoption as it provides the 
guidelines and specific procedures for conducting crash analysis. Another strong reason to adopt 
the manual was to maintain consistency in the policies and procedures for evaluations. One of the 
agencies wished that the HSM adoption would lead to an initiative to set aside local funds to pursue 
safety projects. On the other hand, the lack of analysis of limited access facilities (i.e., freeways), the 
lack of state-specific crash reduction factors (CRFs), and the lack of extensive data were the three 
main reasons for the agencies’ existing reluctance in adopting the manual. Of the 37 responding 
agencies, 11 were unfamiliar with the manual to provide a response. 

Deployment  of  SafetyAnalyst.  SafetyAnalyst  (AASHTO  2010b)  is  a  state-of-the-art  analytical 
tool for making system-wide safety decisions that incorporates all the steps in the roadway safety 
management process. The software incorporates the advanced empirical Bayes (EB) approach and 
acts as a complete “safety toolbox” for any safety office. Although data requirements are intense, 
once the data are imported the analyses are easy requiring minimum statistical expertise. Again, the 
respondents were provided a link in the survey to the SafetyAnalyst homepage to learn about the 
tool.

From Figure 1(c), 62% of responding local agencies either agreed or strongly agreed to take 
advantage of SafetyAnalyst; 35% were neutral and a minority (3%) disagreed. The survey responses 
showed that the local agencies had a motivation to adopt SafetyAnalyst. The agencies hoped that 
SafetyAnalyst could be provided free of charge, along with low-cost training tools. However, at this 
time, FDOT cannot provide it for free since the tool is maintained by the American Association of 
State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 

87

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014Figure 1: Pie Charts of Key Survey Results

88

Traffic Safety PracticesAdoption of Standard Web-Based GIS Application. Since different local agencies adopt multiple 
GIS systems for crash analysis, it is important to obtain their opinion about standardizing web-based 
GIS applications. It was found that the majority of responding local agencies (62%) either agreed or 
strongly agreed on the statewide adoption of a standard web-based GIS system for crash analysis. 
The  responding  agencies  considered  GIS  applications  to  be  efficient,  accurate,  and  manageable 
compared  with  the  existing  non-GIS  methods.  Many  agencies  also  indicated  that  a  GIS  system 
would enable engineers to spatially map crashes, spatially identify crash locations, and produce 
reports  showing  traffic  crash  statistics.  Moreover,  a  web-based  GIS  system  could  increase  the 
accuracy of crash data and the speed with which crash data could be obtained and analyzed.

Although most agencies embraced the idea of a standard GIS application, 8% of responding 
agencies were against it. These agencies were concerned about the costs associated with the tool in 
addition to the resources to be allocated. One agency felt that a standard GIS system could restrict 
some of their employees. Further, the non-uniform nature of data being collected and analyzed was 
considered to be a hurdle to standardize the GIS applications. 

If a standard procedure for crash analysis is to be adopted, the respondents identified the following 
as key issues that have to be accounted for: differences between the old and new crash report forms, 
crashes involving vulnerable road users (i.e., elderly people, bicyclists, and pedestrians), differences 
between urban and rural agricultural communities, and lack of short-form crash reports. Note that 
Florida used to have a standard crash report that had been adopted until December 31, 2010. As 
of January 1, 2011, a new crash report has been released and is currently the standard for crash 
reporting. Compared with the previous crash report, the current one is more detailed and requires 
more time to complete. 

Training on Crash Analysis

With the release of the recent safety analysis tools, the HSM and SafetyAnalyst, training on their 
adoption for crash analysis is essential. This section of the survey sought to determine whether 
FDOT should provide training on crash analysis procedures for local agencies. It was found that 
more than 90% of responding local agencies either agreed or strongly agreed and the remaining 10% 
were neutral. The responding agencies were interested in seeking training in the following priority 
areas:
•	

thorough analysis of crashes, interpretation of data using statistical methods, and provision 
of engineering solutions
use of the HSM and SafetyAnalyst
use of the data in the crash reports
application of CRFs
process of conducting field reviews
use of GIS applications for crash analysis

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	 methods to improve safety of vulnerable road users, e.g., bicyclists and pedestrians
When  asked  about  the  preferred  mode  of  training,  a  majority  of  responding  agencies  (21 
agencies) preferred face-to-face meetings, followed by online web-based training and webinars, 
which received equal preference. 

Working with FDOT District Office 

A good working relationship between local agencies and state district offices is beneficial in improving 
the state’s traffic safety practice. It was found that 62% of responding local agencies worked with 
their  district  office  only  when  a  situation  arose,  22%  held  regular  meetings  for  coordination  of 
efforts, 8% held meetings with CTST, while 3% could not recall their recent encounter with their 

89

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014district office. This shows that more coordination between both major traffic safety stakeholders is 
beneficial.

When asked about ways to improve traffic safety in each agency’s area, 24.5% of local agencies 
wished  to  work  more  closely  with  FDOT  and  13.5%  would  like  to  get  trained  by  FDOT.  The 
remaining 62% were already working closely with their respective district offices. This shows that 
FDOT is successful in coordinating crash analysis across the agencies. Based on their responses, the 
following were the key barriers that have been preventing the agencies from working closely with 
their district office, in order of priority: 

•	
•	
•	

lack of funding
staff limitations
geographical location of local offices, e.g., the FDOT Central Office is far away from the 
local agencies 
differences in priorities and concerns
time constraints
restricted access to statewide tools and training

•	
•	
•	
Local  agencies  were  also  asked  about  the  recommended  assistance  with  FDOT  to  improve 

traffic safety in their jurisdictions. Key suggestions, in order of priority, included:

•	

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

•	
•	

provide more funding to purchase safety-related equipment and crash analysis software 
tools
increase communication, coordination, and information exchange efforts
provide training courses on safety analysis
provide more exposure on the Road Safety Audit tools
implement less restrictive policies
emphasize safety concerns of vulnerable road users, i.e., pedestrians and bicyclists
encourage participation in quarterly meetings with the Safety Office and the CTST, and in 
the Safety Summit meetings (the Safety Summit brings in multi-disciplinary individuals 
who deal with traffic safety)
implement a standard crash analysis software that all agencies can use
prioritize safety-related projects

Safety Concerns, High Crash Locations, and Project Selection and Evaluation

According to the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Systemic Safety Project Selection Tool 
(Preston et al. 2013), the identification of focus crash types and high risk factors is the highest priority 
in the systemic safety planning process. Furthermore, the prioritization of candidate locations (i.e., 
identification of high crash locations [HCLs]) and appropriate selection of improvement projects 
are crucial steps in this process. This is because incorrect identification of HCLs often results in less 
cost-effective solutions and biased prioritization processes. From the survey responses, the highest 
safety concerns were speeding-related, distracted driving, intersection-related, and red-light running 
crashes.  Furthermore,  the  responding  agencies  identified  specific  crash  types,  e.g.,  pedestrian, 
bicycle, rear-end, angle, and left-turn crashes, as potential safety concerns. Particularly, speeding, 
pedestrian and bicycle crashes, and rear-end crashes were commonly listed as major safety issues. 
The survey responses also indicated that the majority of local agencies rank HCLs by crash 
frequency, crash rate, crash type, safety index, or crash severity. Besides these methods, several 
local transportation agencies used the following approaches: 

use web-based crash analysis systems
use GIS analysis and compare locations with those published statewide, as well as with 
specific district 
use observations made by law enforcement officers and field investigations
directly use the list of HCLs provided by FDOT

•	
•	

•	
•	

90

Traffic Safety Practicesuse FDOT crash records
perform crash analysis only when improvement projects are scheduled or upon request

•	
•	
While selecting safety improvement projects, the majority of responding local agencies (14 
agencies)  used  the  benefit-cost  (B/C)  ratio.  Other  methods  included  field  visits,  requests  from 
citizens and law enforcement officers, CRFs from the HSM, engineering judgment, and Road Safety 
Audits. Close to 43% of responding agencies evaluated all implemented projects to determine their 
effectiveness, 30% assumed that treated locations were improved, while 27% evaluated a sample of 
implemented projects. Local agencies mostly used before-and-after crash data analysis to determine 
the effectiveness of the implemented countermeasures. Other evaluation procedures included the 
number  of  complaints  after  the  improvement  projects  were  implemented,  public  opinion,  field 
observations, continuous monitoring of locations, and observation of traffic operations following 
the project implementation. 

Summary of Results

Key findings from the survey of the local transportation agencies were:

	 The majority of local agencies were receptive to the idea of standardizing the crash analysis 

method for agencies in the state.

	 Some  agencies  preferred  to  consider  the  HSM  as  a  standard,  mandating  its  adoption, 
while some others preferred to have the HSM only as a guide, as the HSM analysis was 
considered to be too cumbersome. Some agencies were also unfamiliar with the HSM to 
formulate an opinion about its adoption.

•	 Local agencies were generally interested in adopting SafetyAnalyst. For extensive adoption, 
the responding agencies wished for the software to be provided free of charge along with 
low-cost training tools.

	 The majority of local agencies agreed that a statewide standard web-based GIS system 

should be adopted for crash analysis.

	 The majority of local agencies agreed that FDOT should provide statewide training on 

crash analysis.

	 Face-to-face meetings were by far the most preferable mode of providing training on crash 

analysis, followed by online training and webinars.

	 Providing  more  funding  to  local  agencies,  increasing  communication  and  coordination 
efforts (i.e., via Road Safety Audits), providing additional training courses, and launching 
less restrictive policies were the most important needs of the local agencies.

	 Speeding, pedestrian crashes, bicycle crashes, and rear-end crashes were the highest safety 

concerns to the majority of local agencies.

	 Agencies have been using different methods for evaluating safety improvement projects.

LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICE SURVEY RESULTS

This section summarizes the survey results from 46 law enforcement offices on questions related to 
enforcement locations, traffic violations, safety campaigns, use of crash reports, and working with 
transportation agencies.

Selection of Enforcement Locations

When asked about the specific locations for enforcement of traffic violations, 83% of the responding 
agencies stated that they regularly focus on specific locations, mostly locations with relatively high 
prior  citation  records.  However,  two-thirds  of  responding  law  enforcement  agencies  analyzed 
crash records to identify enforcement locations. One of the approaches was to rank the three most 

91

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014hazardous  signalized  intersections  with  respect  to  total  crash  count  every  month,  and  conduct 
traffic enforcement at these intersections. After enforcement, one-month before-and-after crash data 
were compared. Crash data analysis was also performed by time of the day, day of the week, and 
contributing factors. 

Other popular methods included identifying the top ten locations based on recent short-term 
crash history. A few law enforcement agencies plotted crashes on GIS maps, while other agencies 
reviewed  actual  police  reports  in  addition  to  analyzing  crash  summary  data.  Besides  analyzing 
crash records, several methods were adopted for identifying enforcement locations, such as: citizen 
complaints,  surveys  conducted  annually  to  identify  HCLs  for  specific  time  periods,  review  of 
dispatched calls, and the statewide list of HCLs. 

Among  the  above  identified  methods  to  identify  enforcement  locations,  41%  of  agencies 
identified  citizen  complaints  as  the  most  common  method,  followed  by  frequently  observed 
violations by patrolling officers (33%) and analysis of crash records (22%). Requests from local 
elected officials were among the least common methods. A majority of respondents (87%) noted 
that they would make use of FDOT’s crash location maps for enforcement, while 7% were neutral. 
This shows that the majority of the agencies are willing to use the available assistance from FDOT.

Traffic Violations and Safety Campaigns

Frequency and Seriousness of Traffic Violations. This section identifies the frequency (Figure 2) 
and seriousness (Figure 3) of different types of traffic violations to highlight the necessary safety 
campaigns to be prioritized by law enforcement officers. Note that these violations were mainly 
identified from the standard crash report. The results in Figures 2 and 3 were generated from the 
responses of the law enforcement officers while calculating the percentage of selection of each traffic 
violation under each category. It should be noted that both figures were based on the impressions of 
the respondents, and not based on actual data.

Figure 2: Frequency of Occurrence of Different Traffic Violations

92

Traffic Safety PracticesAs shown in Figure 2, the five most common traffic violations were speeding (75%), failing 
to use safety belts (50%), failing to properly restrain a child (40%), driving under influence (DUI) 
(40%), and running red lights (15%). On the other hand, the five most uncommon violations included 
traffic blockage (60%), failing to move over (55%), illegal parking (55%), following too closely 
(50%), and illegal turning (45%).

Figure 3: Seriousness of Different Traffic Violations

     As  shown  in  Figure  3,  the  extremely  serious  traffic  violations  were  DUI  (95%),  running  red 
lights (80%), failing to properly restrain a child (70%), and speeding (70%). The most trivial traffic 
violations  included  illegal  parking  (55%),  traffic  blockage  (35%),  failing  to  move  over  (10%), 
following  too  closely  (5%),  and  illegal  turning  (5%). The  results  indicated  that  DUI,  speeding, 
running red lights, and failure to properly restrain a child were seen as the most serious and most 
common violations, possibly because they could result in severe injury crashes. DUI was also cited 
as one of the highest risk factors of road safety in the study by Erke et al. (2009). 

Effectiveness of Enforcement of Traffic Violations. This section discusses the opinions of law 
enforcement  officers  about  the  effectiveness  of  enforcing  different  traffic  violations. As  shown 
in Figure 4, the enforcement of DUI and speeding (60% each), running red lights and failure to 
properly restrain a child (50% each), and failure to use safety belts and running stop sign (40% each) 
were perceived as extremely effective. On the other hand, enforcement of illegal parking (30%), 
traffic blockage (20%), following too closely (10%), and illegal turning (10%) were considered 
ineffective. It is observed that those violations to be strictly enforced were also identified as the most 
serious violations.

93

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014Figure 4: Effectiveness of Enforcement of Different Traffic Violations

Effectiveness of Safety Campaigns. Law enforcement officers usually conduct safety campaigns 
to tackle traffic violations. It was found that over two-thirds of the responding agencies follow up 
with an evaluation to assess the effectiveness of their safety campaigns. Law enforcement officers 
used several methods for evaluation, which testifies to the diversity of the evaluation procedures 
implemented. In order of the frequency of adoption, the four common evaluation procedures were: 

•	
•	
•	
•	

comparing reduction in traffic violations pre and post safety campaigns
conducting pre and post traffic surveys
comparing before-and-after crash data
comparing citizen complaints pre and post safety campaigns

Use of Crash Reports

Law enforcement officers are responsible for completing the crash report, the primary source of 
information for conducting crash data analysis. Therefore, the training they receive is vital. It was 
found that 57% of responding officers either agreed or strongly agreed that they received adequate 
training in completing the crash report, 22% were neutral, while 21% either disagreed or strongly 
disagreed on receiving adequate training. This indicates that most police officers acquire the required 
knowledge to fill out a crash report.

The main challenge in filling out a crash report was being lengthy and time-consuming. One 
interesting response was that “the report is considered difficult to understand without instructions 
manual.” Another major issue was the time the officers took to do the paperwork or fill out the crash 
report electronically. On the other hand, the law enforcement officers considered crash location as 
the most useful information in the crash report, possibly since they could use this information for 
enforcement purposes. Much of the respondents’ interest was geared toward crash type, crash cause, 
and manner of collision (or the first harmful event). Further, information on speeding, distracted 
driving, seatbelt usage, and DUI were of interest to the law enforcement officers. 

Working with Local Transportation Agencies 

Working Relationship with Local Transportation Agencies. In identifying the current working 
relationship with local agencies, it was found that 51% of the respondents held regular meetings 
with  local  transportation  agencies  for  discussion  and  coordination  of  efforts;  29%  worked  with 
transportation agencies only when a situation arose; and 20% could not recall their recent encounter 

94

Traffic Safety Practiceswith local transportation agencies. This shows that most law enforcement agencies were proactive 
in coordinating with local transportation agencies.

It  was  also  observed  that  most  of  the  barriers  hindering  the  relationship  included  limited 
resources (budget, time, and manpower), minimum communication, lack of organized meetings, and 
politics; however, very few (five) agencies indicated that there were no barriers. To improve traffic 
safety, the law enforcement agencies provided the following key suggestions to local transportation 
agencies:

•	
•	
•	

•	
•	

organize more meetings with transportation agencies, e.g., through Road Safety Audits
provide more assistance at DUI and safety check points
provide  more  funding,  e.g.,  to  allow  education  and  enforcement  for  pedestrians  and 
bicyclists
report any changes in the roadway cross-section/design
receive continuous updates about changing traffic laws 

Technical  Assistance  from  FDOT.  From  the  survey  responses,  it  was  noticed  that  the  law 
enforcement community was interested in getting assistance from FDOT to help improve traffic 
safety and crash reporting. Specifically, the law enforcement officers were interested in technical 
assistance from FDOT on: 

up-to-date crash statistics in the jurisdiction’s region
funding to purchase items for traffic safety
information on traffic counts and local crash data
crime and traffic mapping

•	
•	
•	
•	
As for the software tools, the law enforcement agencies would like to be provided with:
•	
•	 maps
•	
•	
•	 major traffic tracking software for smaller agencies
•	

electronic crash reports
electronic ticket writer for crash reporting

standard computer program to fill out and retrieve crash reports

online crash database

Summary of Results

The following were the key findings from the survey of the law enforcement community:
	 Most law enforcement officers monitor locations with high prior citation records.
	 Citizen  complaints,  observed  frequent  violations  by  patrolling  officers,  and  analysis  of 

crash data were the most common methods of selecting enforcement locations.  

	 The majority of agencies were interested in receiving assistance from FDOT for enforcement 

purposes, e.g., using the HCL maps provided by FDOT.

	 Speeding, failing to use safety belts, failing to properly restrain a child, and DUI were the 

most common violations.

least common violations.

	 Traffic blockage, failing to move over, illegal parking, and following too closely were the 

	 Enforcement of DUI, speeding, running red lights, and failure to properly restrain a child 

were perceived as the most effective measures to improve traffic safety.

	 Enforcement of illegal parking, traffic blockage, following too closely, and illegal turning 

were considered to be least-effective in improving traffic safety. 

	 DUI and running red lights were the most serious traffic violations. 
	 Most agencies followed up with an evaluation to assess the effectiveness of the implemented 

safety campaigns.

95

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014	 The most useful information in the crash report for the majority of law enforcement officers 

	 The  majority  of  agencies  held  regular  meetings  with  local  transportation  agencies  for 

was the crash location.

coordination of efforts.

	 The majority of agencies emphasized a need to organize more meetings with transportation 
agencies and to get more assistance from them, especially at DUI and safety checkpoints.
	 The police officers desired technical assistance from FDOT, which mainly included up-to-

date crash statistics and funding to purchase items for traffic safety.

CONCLUSIONS

The SHSP aims to integrate the four E’s of highway safety: engineering, education, enforcement, 
and EMS. To implement SHSP, state DOTs are increasingly looking to reach out to local agencies 
and  law  enforcement  officials. This  paper  described  an  effort  by  FDOT  to  identify  the  existing 
safety practices and needs of local transportation agencies and law enforcement offices in Florida. 
This study attempted to find out current traffic safety practices and needs from the perspective of 
local transportation and law enforcement agencies. Two online surveys were developed targeting 
local  transportation  agencies  and  the  law  enforcement  community  in  Florida.  Both  surveys 
are  easily  transferable  to  a  larger  audience  in  other  state  DOTs  that  are  willing  to  reach  out  to 
their local agencies. Furthermore, both surveys supplement SHSP’s effort with ways to improve 
the coordination between various safety agencies (i.e., state DOTs, local transportation, and law 
enforcement) to enhance traffic safety on all public roads. 

Both the local transportation agencies and the law enforcement agencies emphasized the need 
to organize more frequent Road Safety Audit meetings to proactively improve traffic safety of public 
roads. In addition, both agencies agreed that speeding-related crashes were of highest safety concern 
and their continuous enforcement would be a major benefit. Also, conducting extensive campaigns 
to reduce DUI, running red lights, failure to properly restrain a child, running stop sign, and failure 
to use safety belts violations could be beneficial. Although some local agencies were reluctant to 
adopt the HSM and SafetyAnalyst	due to extensive data requirements, required statistical expertise, 
and resource constraints, adequate training on these tools is expected to encourage their adoption.

Survey responses from local agencies revealed that over 70% of responding agencies agreed 
to standardize crash analysis procedures and over 90% agreed that FDOT should provide statewide 
training  on  crash  analysis,  and  face-to-face  meetings  were  by  far  the  most  preferable  mode  of 
training.  The  law  enforcement  agencies  survey  responses  showed  that  speeding,  failing  to  use 
safety belts, failing to properly restrain a child, and DUI were the most common violations. Law 
enforcement officers use diverse evaluation procedures to assess effectiveness of safety campaigns, 
such as comparing before-and-after crash data and comparing reduction in traffic violations pre and 
post safety campaigns. Two-thirds of responding law enforcement agencies analyzed crash records 
to  identify  enforcement  locations.  Besides  analyzing  crash  records,  citizen  complaints,  surveys, 
review of dispatched calls, and the FDOT list of HCLs were the other methods used to identify 
locations for enforcement.

The  study  identified  several  important  lessons  for  other  state  DOTs  to  consider  in  order  to 
improve traffic safety analysis procedures and practices. For example, one of the lessons learned 
from both survey responses is to improve coordination between various districts and related local 
transportation  agencies,  as  well  as  between  transportation  agencies  and  the  law  enforcement 
community. This coordination could be organized via face-to-face meetings or webinars to discuss 
commonly identified safety issues and possible solutions, changes in the roadway cross-section, 
and changes in traffic laws. The study also highlighted suggestions from local agencies for better 
assistance with state DOTs, e.g., provision of training courses on safety analysis, greater exposure 
to the Road Safety Audit tools, more flexible information exchange, and provision of police reports 

96

Traffic Safety Practicesin a timely manner. In addition, addressing law enforcement officers’ concerns about police reports 
and training police officers to correctly code the crash report are essential to improve the accuracy 
in crash reporting. More funding for local transportation and law enforcement agencies to conduct 
safety studies is also essential. 

Results from the two surveys could be directed toward crash standardization, e.g., for inter-
agency collaboration and data sharing. Based on the survey results, state DOTs could compare and 
identify the common practices and needs of the local transportation agencies and law enforcement 
agencies to assist in standardizing crash analysis procedures. Further research efforts could compare 
the results from this study with those from other states to determine how the crash analysis practices 
and needs vary and concur across states.

Acknowledgments 

This  research  was  funded  by  the  Research  Center  of  the  Florida  Department  of  Transportation 
(FDOT). The authors thank the project manager, Mr. Joseph Santos, of the FDOT Safety Office 
for his guidance and support throughout the project. The authors are grateful to the many local 
transportation professionals and law enforcement officers who took time to complete the online 
surveys.

References

American Association of State Highways and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). Highway	Safety	
Manual.  First  Edition,  Transportation  Research  Board  of  the  National Academies,  Washington, 
D.C., 2010a.

American Association of State Highways and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). Safety	Analyst	
2010b. http://www.SafetyAnalyst.org. Accessed April 2011.

Bailey, L. and D. Huft. “Improving Crash Reporting: Study of Crash Reporting Practice on Nine 
Indian Reservations.” Transportation	Research	Record 2078, (2008): 72–79.

Boile, M. and K. Ozbay. The	Future	of	Transportation	Modeling. Final Report FHWA-NJ-2005-016, 
New Jersey Department of Transportation, Trenton, NJ, 2005.

Chang, H. and C. Shih. “Using a Multidimensional Rasch Model Approach to Measure the Police’s 
Perceived  Ability  to  Detect,  Detain  and  Intercept  DWI  Vehicles  When  Conducting  Sobriety 
Checkpoints.” Accident	Analysis	&	Prevention 48, (2012): 505–517.

Cherry, E., R. Floyd, T. Graves, S. Martin, and D. Ward. Crash	Data	Collection	and	Analysis	System. 
Final Report FHWA-AZ-06-537, Arizona Department of Transportation, Phoenix, AZ, 2006.

Coffman, M. and C. Monsere. Enhancing	Targeted	Traffic	Enforcement	Efforts	in	Portland,	Oregon. 
Presentation for the ITE District 6 Annual Meeting, Honolulu, HI, 2006.

Erke, A., C. Goldenbeld, and T. Vaa. “The Effects of Drunk-Driving Checkpoints on Crashes–A 
Meta-Analysis.” Accident	Analysis	&	Prevention 41, (2009): 914–923.

Gan, A., K. Haleem, P. Alluri, and D. Saha. Standardization	of	Crash	Analysis	in	Florida. Final 
Report BDK80 977-10, Florida Department of Transportation, Tallahassee, FL, 2012.

Highway  Safety  Improvement  Program  (HSIP).  http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/hsip/.  Accessed  July 
2013.

97

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014Hurst, P. “Traffic Officers’ Attitudes Toward Blood Alcohol Law Enforcement.” Accident	Analysis	
&	Prevention 12 (4), (1980): 259–266.

Jonah, B., L. Yuen, E. Au-Yeung, D. Paterson, N. Dawson, R. Thiessen, and H. Arora. “Front-Line 
Police Officers’ Practices, Perceptions and Attitudes About the Enforcement of Impaired Driving 
Laws in Canada.” Accident	Analysis	&	Prevention 31, (1999): 421–443.

Knezek,  C.  and  J.  Hansen.  The	 New	 Jersey	 Police	 Technical	Assistance	 Program.  Final  Report 
FHWA-NJ-2007-005, New Jersey Department of Transportation, Trenton, NJ, 2007.

Lee, J. and F. Mannering. Analysis	of	Roadside	Accident	Frequency	and	Severity	and	Roadside	
Safety	Management. Final Report WA-RD 475.1, Washington State Department of Transportation, 
Olympia, WA, 1999.

Mickee, A.  “A  Comparative  Evaluation  of  Crash  Data  Quality  Identification  Methods.”  Thesis 
(M.S.). University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA, 2008.

Moving  Ahead  for  Progress  in  the  21st  Century  (MAP-21).  http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/map21/. 
Accessed July 2013.

Nikolaev, A.,  M.  Robbins,  and  S.  Jacobson.  “Evaluating  the  Impact  of  Legislation  Prohibiting 
Hand-Held Cell Phone Use While Driving.” Transportation	Research	Part	A 44, (2010): 182–193.

Preston, H., R. Storm, J. Bennett, and B. Wemple. Systemic	Safety	Project	Selection	Tool. Final 
Report FHWA-SA-13-019, Federal Highway Administration, Office of Safety, Washington, D.C., 
2013.

Safe Accountable Flexible Efficient Transportation Equity Act – A Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-
LU). The Library of Congress, 109th Congress, House of Representatives, Report 109-203, 2005. 
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/safetealu/. Accessed June 2012.

Schrock, S., G. Ullman, and N. Trout. “Survey of State Law Enforcement Personnel on Work Zone 
Enforcement Practices.” Transportation	Research	Record 1818, (2002): 7–11.

Strategic Highway Safety Plan (SHSP). http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/hsip/shsp/. Accessed July 2013.

Kirolos Haleem is	a	research	associate	in	the	Department	of	Civil	and	Environmental	Engineering	
at	Florida	International	University	(FIU),	Miami.	Haleem	received	his	master’s	and	Ph.D.	degrees	
in	civil	engineering	from	the	University	of	Central	Florida	(UCF)	in	2007	and	2009,	respectively.	
His	areas	of	expertise	are	traffic	safety	analysis,	application	of	statistical	models	and	data	mining	
techniques	in	transportation	engineering,	traffic	operations,	traffic	simulation,	and	ITS.	At	FIU,	he	
conducts	traffic	safety	research	and	supervises	Ph.D.	and	master’s	students.

Albert Gan is	a	professor	of	transportation	engineering	in	the	Department	of	Civil	and	Environmental	
Engineering	at	Florida	International	University	(FIU)	and	is	also	the	deputy	director	of	the	Lehman	
Center	for	Transportation	Research	at	FIU.	Gan’s	areas	of	research	include	highway	safety,	traffic	
simulation,	ITS,	GIS,	transit	planning,	and	demand	modeling.	He	has	authored	or	co-authored	more	
than	150	refereed	papers,	technical	reports,	and	articles.	

98

Traffic Safety PracticesPriyanka Alluri is	a	research	associate	in	the	Department	of	Civil	and	Environmental	Engineering	
at	 Florida	 International	 University,	 Miami.	 Alluri	 graduated	 with	 a	 Ph.D.	 in	 civil	 engineering	
focusing	on	transportation	safety	from	Clemson	University,	South	Carolina.	Her	research	interests	
include	safety	data	analysis,	development	of	SPFs	and	CMFs,	applications	of	the	Highway	Safety	
Manual	and	SafetyAnalyst,	trends	in	highway	safety,	GIS	in	transportation	safety,	and	human	factors	
and	driving	behavior.	

Dibakar Saha is	a	senior	Ph.D.	student	at	Florida	International	University,	Miami,	with	emphasis	
in	transportation	engineering.	His	research	interests	mainly	focus	on	highway	traffic	safety	analysis	
and	ITS.	

99

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014100

