TRANSIMS Implementation for a 
Small Network and Comparison with 
Enhanced Four-Step Model
by Mansoureh Jeihani and Anam Ardeshiri

Travel	demand	forecasting	is	a	major	tool	to	assist	decision	makers	in	transportation	planning.	
While	the	conventional	four-step	trip-based	approach	is	the	dominant	method	to	perform	travel	
demand	analysis,	behavioral	advances	have	been	made	in	the	past	decade.	This	paper	proposes	and	
applies	an	enhancemnt	to	the	four-step	travel	demand	analysis	model	called	Sub-TAZ.	Furthermore,	
as	an	initial	step	toward	activity-based	models,	a	TRANSIMS	Track-1	approach	is	implemented	
utilizing	a	detailed	network	developed	in	Sub-TAZ	approach.	The	conventional	four-step,	Sub-TAZ,	
and	TRANSIMS	models	were	estimated	in	a	small	case	study	for	Fort	Meade,	Maryland,	with	zonal	
trip	tables.	The	models	were	calibrated	and	validated	for	the	base	year	(2005),	and	the	forecasted	
results	for	the	year	(2010)	were	compared	to	actual	ground	counts	of	traffic	volume	and	speed.	The	
study	evaluated	the	forecasting	ability	of	TRANSIMS	versus	the	conventional	and	enhanced	four-
step	models	and	provided	critical	observations	concerning	strategies	for	the	further	implementation	
of	TRANSIMS.

BACKGROUND 

Traffic pattern prediction is necessary for infrastructure improvement, and travel demand modeling 
provides tools to forecast travel patterns under various conditions. This modeling involves a series 
of mathematical equations that represent how people make travel choices. Traditional travel demand 
models use the four-step method, which was introduced in the 1950s and has been used widely in 
transportation planning. Although the four-step method has been practical in producing aggregate 
forecasts,  it  has  some  shortcomings.  For  example,  in  short-range  planning  networks,  existing 
and newly constructed roads become congested much faster than forecasted (TRB 2007) and the 
performance of current four-step models is not always satisfactory. Additionally, these models are not 
behavioral in nature and as a result they are unable to represent the time chosen for travel, travelers’ 
responses to demand policies (e.g., toll roads, road pricing, and transit vouchers), non-motorized 
travel,  time-specific  traffic  volumes  and  speeds,  and  freight  and  commercial  vehicle  movement 
(TRB 2007). Some researchers have modified the four-step model to improve its efficiency while 
others have proposed new alternatives such as activity-based models. 

One  modification  designed  to  yield  more  realistic  traffic  volumes  on  roadways  adjacent  to 
zone-centroid connectors was developed and used by the Virginia Department of Transportation 
for  its  regional,  county,  corridor,  subarea,  and  intersection  studies  (Mann  2002).  This  modified 
four-step model, designated b-node, used zone-level network trip tables and performed a subzone 
capacity-restrained traffic assignment.  The model allocated the zone trip table into subzones by land 
activity (when there is information on land use in the subzone) or by equal weights. It was reported 
that despite lumpiness where the centroid connectors tied into the network, the model produced 
smoother traffic volumes (Mann 2004). 

The fixed-order sequential approach of the traditional four-step models suffers from inconsistency 
among the flow values in each step. Recent research has made some improvements to the traditional 
sequential approach. Zhou et al. (2009) developed a combined travel demand model using random 
utility theory. This model brought consistency to travel choice and incorporated behavioral aspects 

23

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014in the traditional four-step models. In another study, a model was developed to assess changes in 
system performance measures due to slight changes in the network (Yang and Chen 2009). Festa et 
al. (2006) improved travel demand forecasting by employing experimental sequential models that 
simulate trip chains. They calibrated and validated behavioral random utility models to simulate the 
traveler’s decision process. 

Four-step models employ static traffic assignment (STA), which assumes that traffic is steady-
state, link volumes are time-invariant, the time to traverse a link depends only on the number of 
vehicles on that link, and that vehicle queues are stacked vertically and do not traverse to upstream 
links in the network. STA has very restrictive assumptions, which limit its applicability.  To enhance 
STA, Jeihani et al. (2006a) calculated link delay as a function of link flow and flow on adjacent links 
using intersection delay calculations. In their proposed method, a combination of the Frank-Wolf1 
algorithm and the method of successive averages was used to model multi-path vehicle assignment 
within reasonable computational time for small- and medium-sized transportation networks (Jeihani 
et al. 2006a). 

Dynamic traffic assignment (DTA) models were introduced as an extension of STA. In DTA 
models, demand is allowed to be time-varying so that the number of vehicles passing through a 
link  and  the  corresponding  link  travel  times  become  time-dependent.  These  complexities  are 
implemented in some traffic simulation software using microscopic models (Cheng and Wang 2013). 
Demand estimation, supply presentation, methods for computing dynamic traffic assignment, and 
convergence among several well-known computer packages were compared by Jeihani (2007). 

Activity-based modeling is a relatively new method that replicates the activities of individuals 
in a network for a 24-hour period. The four-step model aggregates the trip generation process and 
finds the total number of trips produced by each development type (e.g., residential and commercial) 
in traffic analysis zones. Conversely, the activity-based model is disaggregated and finds trips for 
each  traveler.  Four  themes  characterize  the  activity-based  framework:  travel  derives  from  the 
demand to participate in an activity, and sequences or patterns of behavior are the basic unit of 
analysis; household and activities influence travel behavior; spatial, temporal, transportation, and 
interpersonal interdependencies constrain activity or travel behavior; and activity-based approaches 
reflect the scheduling of activities in time and space (McNally 2000). The Virginia Department 
of Transportation (VDOT 2009) reports that activity-based models are currently used by the New 
Hampshire  Department  of  Transportation  (since  1998),  San  Francisco  County  Transportation 
Authority (since 2001), Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission (since 2005), New York Metro 
Transportation  Commission  (since  2005),  Tahoe  Regional  Planning  Agency  (since  2007),  and 
since 2007 by the Sacramento Area Council of Governments. The Atlanta Regional Commission, 
Denver Regional Council of Governments, Portland Metro, Ohio Department of Transportation, 
Metropolitan Transportation Commission, and the Puget Sound Regional Council all have activity-
based models in development (VDOT 2009).

Transportation Analysis and Simulation System (TRANSIMS) is an integrated travel demand 
activity-based modeling system developed by the Los Alamos National Laboratory to eventually 
replace the four-step travel demand model. It is a microsimulation model that addresses current 
legislative  policy  issues  facing  transportation  planners,  including  sustainability,  environmental 
impact, and the emerging intelligent transportation systems.  It consists of a series of modules that 
produce synthetic households. The modules are the Population Synthesizer, the Activity Generator, 
the Route Planner, the Microsimulator, the Emission Estimator, and the Feedback. 

While TRANSIMS has been available for about two decades, it has not been widely employed 
because it is data intensive, complex, and difficult to implement. Several researchers and practitioners 
have attempted to operate it on different networks. A component of TRANSIMS (referred to as 
Track-1 by practitioners) was implemented and calibrated in Chittenden County, Vermont (Lawe et 
al. 2009). It was reported that TRANSIMS and the four-step model for three screen lines (imaginary 
lines to select traffic count locations in an organized manner so that the major travel movements 

24

TRANSIMS Implementationare measured) produced similar results. TRANSIMS nearly replicated the daily trip distributions; 
however, there were shifts in both the exact time and value of the morning and afternoon peak 
periods possibly caused by inaccuracies in the trip table (Lawe et al. 2009). TRANSIMS Track-1 
was also employed by Rilett et al. (2003) in a case study of El Paso, TX, by importing the origin-
destination (OD) matrix and network from the four-step models. It was found that TRANSIMS 
needed more input data and more sophisticated troubleshooting than the four-step model (Rilett et 
al. 2003). Dixon et al. (2007) compared TRANSIMS estimates of intersection delay to field data 
and concluded that TRANSIMS’ delay estimates for signalized intersections were very close to the 
real-world observations, but overestimated unsignalized intersection delays. Track-1 TRANSIMS 
was also applied to a small sized MPO in Illinois. In comparison with the four-step model, the 
TRANSIMS results were better for links, which were collector roads, than those obtained following 
FHWA guidelines (Ullah et al. 2011).

Jeihani et al. (2006b) developed a new heuristic algorithm to determine dynamic user equilibria 
(DUE) and incorporated it into TRANSIMS. The developed DUE model was applied to networks 
in Blacksburg, Virginia, and Portland, Oregon. An improved distribution of travelers was obtained 
while consuming less than 17%–33% of the computing time required by the original assignment 
model  in  TRANSIMS.  Zhang  and  Mohammadian  (2008)  developed  a  new  methodology  to 
facilitate household travel data transferability for local areas. With their proposed data simulation 
tool, metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) can avoid the high costs associated with data 
collection for micro-simulation models such as TRANSIMS. 

This study proposes a three-phase process to transition from the traditional four-step model 
to an activity-based model. The first step is an improvement to the four-step model, which will 
be  referred  to  as  the  Sub-TAZ  model.  The  Sub-TAZ  model  provides  smoother  traffic  than  the 
four-step model and requires a detailed network that includes minor roads and driveways. It also 
divides the traffic analysis zones (TAZs) into smaller segments called Sub-TAZ. The second step is 
TRANSIMS Track-1, which uses the detailed network and origin-destination matrices from the first 
step and performs a dynamic traffic assignment. The final step is TRANSIMS Track-2, which is an 
activity-based model. The study then applies the traditional four-step model, the proposed Sub-TAZ 
model, and TRANSIMS Track-1 on a small network and then validates and compares them for two 
horizons. The study also compares the ability of TRANSIMS to that of the prior four-step models 
regarding planning and future demand forecasting.

FOUR-STEP MODEL FOR A SMALL AREA NETWORK

The selected case study includes Maryland Route 175 (MD-175) and the surrounding roads, in a 100- 
square kilometers area in central Maryland. This area is growing and has many new developments 
constructed. A four-step model for this small area was developed based on the Baltimore Metropolitan 
Council’s (BMC) regional model (i.e., a travel forecasting model for Baltimore metropolitan area). 
The developed model is calibrated and validated for the base year 2005 and it is called the base 
model. As presented in Figure 1, there are 28 traffic analysis zones (TAZs) and 327 links in the study 
area. Thirteen of the 28 TAZs are external (i.e., outside the study area) and all trips outside the study 
area are assumed to traverse one of these TAZs to enter the study area. 

Ground counts of traffic were obtained for approximately 13% of the links in the study area. 
Individual  link  errors  were  calculated  by  subtracting  the  estimated  model’s  volume  from  the 
link’s ground count. The model was calibrated and validated according to the Federal Highway 
Administration’s (FHWA) guidelines to reasonably represent reality (Ismart 1990). Equations (1) to 
(3) were used to measure how well the calibration performed: 

25

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014(1) 

            

(2) 

RMSE
    

=

r
 

(

∑

2

(

x

∑
)
−

yx
).(
2

xn

)(

yxn
−
∑

y

(

2

)

−

yn

2

)

y

2
])

ee

=
        

[(

∑ −
x
n
∑
x
n

(3) 

AE

x

|

∑
y
|
= ∑

−
x

×

%100

where, r	is the correlation coefficient; RMSE is the root mean square error; x is ground count of 
traffic; y  is the calibrated traffic volume; n is the number of observations; and AE is the absolute 
error. The calibration and validation results for the base model are in Table 1.  

Figure 1: TAZs and Links in the Base Model

ENHANCEMENTS TO THE FOUR-STEP MODEL

Sub-TAZ and TRANSIMS Track-1 models were developed as modifications to the four-step model 
and calibrated and validated for the small study area for the base year 2005. 

Sub-TAZ Model

One  of  the  reported  problems  associated  with  the  current  four-step  models  is  the  lumpiness  of 
loadings  around  centroid  connectors.  This  is  because  all  trips  are  generated  from  a  centroid  in 
one  zone  and  destined  to  other  zones  via  a  few  imaginary centroid connectors. As  a  result,  the 
26

TRANSIMS Implementationconnection between the imaginary centroid connectors and the major roads becomes very congested 
with traffic while other segments of the major road are less utilized. The proposed new approach, 
the Sub-TAZ model, addressed this problem by including minor roads and driveways in the network 
and allowing each zone to be divided into up to 12 subzones depending on local road and driveway 
locations. Also, each zone can be divided based on land use instead of roads if it has land available 
for development. 

If land use and socio-economic data for all subzones are available, the input data to the four-
step model can be expanded to reflect subzone information and the regular four-step model applied 
at the subzone level. However, since all the required data are usually unavailable at the subzone 
level, the proposed method applies the trip generation step in the zonal level. The productions and 
attractions of each zone—the trip generation output—are then divided between the subzones. This 
division is performed equally among the zones if there is not much information about sub-zonal land 
use. For example, if a zone is divided into four subzones, each subzone is allocated one-fourth of 
the total trip productions and attractions of the original zone if information is unavailable about sub-
zonal land uses such as trip generators. If this information is available, then total trip productions 
and attractions are distributed proportionally and not equally. Due to the absence of data on sub-
zonal land uses, the distributions are based on equal weights.

In comparison with the b-node model (Mann 2004), which divides the origin to destination trips 
and zones into subzones in the last step (traffic assignment) of the four-step model, the Sub-TAZ 
divides the zones into subzones in the second step (trip distribution). Therefore, the output of the 
trip generation procedure is divided into the number of subzones in each zone, and the rest of the 
steps of the four-step model use the extended matrices. The result is a detailed network that includes 
all local streets and developments’ driveways and represent a more realistic road network than the 
base model.

In Figure 2, the Sub-TAZ model includes 55 zones whose detailed network consists of 1,782 
links and 1,461 nodes. As in the four-step model, the Sub-TAZ model assumes that all vehicles 
originate from and travel to zone centroids and uses imaginary links (centroid connectors) to connect 
to the highway network. The Sub-TAZ model was developed, calibrated, and validated for the study 
area. The results are presented in Table 1.

Table 1: Calibration/Validation Results of the Base, Sub-TAZ, and TRANSIMS Models
Calibration/Validation

Sub-TAZ

Base

FHWA 
Guideline

TRANSIMS

Correlation coefficient
Percent error regional-wide
Sum of differences by functional class
Freeway
Principal Arterial
Minor Arterial
Collector

0.88
5%

7%
10%
15%
25%

0.94
-5.7%

-5.6%
-11.5%
1.0%
-41.2%

0.92
5.8%

-1.7%
0.2%
44.4%
-5.4%

0.93
10.9%

11.5%
14.9%
4.7%
-1.4%

TRANSIMS Model

TRANSIMS is based on individual behavior and interactions. It traces and simulates the movements 
of each individual traveler in a fully described network as that traveler accomplishes travel activities 
in a 24-hour period. TRANSIMS also collects statistics on traffic, congestion, and pollution. The 
major  goal  of  applying  TRANSIMS  for  such  a  small  study  area  is  to  compare  its  forecasting 
capability to that of the four-step models.

27

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014Figure 2: The Sub-TAZ Network for MD-175

TRANSIMS as a travel model improvement program aims to precisely model the interaction 
between demand and supply. Micro-simulation is typically the supply side of TRANSIMS, while 
Track-1 and Track-2 are the two approaches to enhance the demand side. In most studies, researchers 
utilize the standard trip origin-destination matrix for the demand side, which can be simply extracted 
from the existing four-step models of the desired study area. The Track-1 approach is mainly a trip-
based approach to the TRANSIMS model that only employs Route Planner and Microsimulator 
modules. Track-1’s advantage over the four-step models is its dynamic traffic assignment capability. 
The Track-2 approach, which is activity-based, utilizes the whole TRANSIMS model package 
(including the Population Synthesizer, Activity Generator and Router modules) to forecast travel 
demand.  This  approach  is  more  complicated  and  more  data  intensive,  but  is  microscopic  and 
addresses many of the existing problems in the four-step models. Track-2 was also developed in 
this study. However, the results were not plausible due to the small size of the network. The Track-2 
model underestimated traffic volumes because of trip-to-activity conversion problems for external 
zones. That is, the current Track-2 model does not convert external trips to activities and, therefore, 
does not include external trips. This issue does not affect models for large areas since external trips 
are negligible compared with the areas’ trips. 

Two major inputs from the four-step model are required to create Track-1 of the TRANSIMS 
model. The first is network data, which must be converted into TRANSIMS format. TRANSIMS 
requires considerably more detailed network data than the traditional four-step models. Since this 
research created a detailed network for the Sub-TAZ model down to the local level of roadway 
classification,  the  detailed  network  is  completely  compatible  with  the  TRANSIMS’  model 
requirement.  Therefore,  TRANSIMS  network  was  completed  by  removing  the  virtual  centroid 
connectors  from  the  Sub-TAZ  model.  The  second  input  to  Track-1  is  demand  files,  which  are 
represented  by  the  four-step  OD  trip  matrices.  The  demand  files  matrices  were  converted  into 
TRANSIMS format (see the Convert Trip Section). 

28

TRANSIMS ImplementationNetwork.  TRANSIMS developers have developed some utility programs to create all required files 
using four major inputs: node, link, shape, and zone files converted from a four-step model. As a 
result, other inputs such as parking and activity locations are not required to be entered manually. 
The four aforementioned files are similar to those from four-step models but are more detailed. For 
example, turn pockets (pocket lanes to turn right or left) and merge lanes (high-occupancy-vehicle 
lanes) are determined. Three files of highways (links), endpoints (nodes), and TAZ were exported 
from TransCAD to shape files (geographical format) and then converted to TRANSIMS format using 
GISNet and TRANSIMSNet. Some manual adjustments were made to make the files acceptable by 
GISNet, which is a useful control key that exports shape files to text files. The TRANSIMSNet utility 
program was then utilized to synthesize the TRANSIMS network and generate other network inputs 
such as activity locations. The log file was checked for warning messages after TRANSIMSNet 
was run and corrections were made as required. The following files were generated as TRANSIMS 
network files: link, node, process link, signal, transit, activity location, parking, shape, and zone. 

TRANSIMS conceptually views the network as a set of interconnected single-mode layers. 
Thus, a separate layer exists for each travel mode (walk, bike, car, bus, rail, and trolley). At designated 
locations in each layer (activity location, parking location and transit stops), a special link called 
a process link connects one single mode layer to another. These process links allow intermodal 
interactions to take place from one layer to another. For example, a person can switch from walk (W) 
mode to car (C) mode, then transit (T) mode, and then go back to walk mode to go from his home 
to his work place using process links, and this trip can be presented by WCTW. The parking file 
includes information about parking such as identity (ID), type, capacity, and location. TRANSIMS 
assumes vehicle start and end locations are in a parking lot.  An activity location represents a place 
where a household member would travel to and from and includes such information as ID, node, 
link, and zone.

Activity locations in the external zone required specific attention. This is because external links 
in the study area were mostly freeways with separate origin and destination activity locations.  Also, 
external trips may not be routed properly when an inbound link is the destination or an outbound 
link is the origin.

Convert Trip. To develop the Track-1 approach in TRANSIMS, the four-step model’s zone-to-
zone trip tables for different trip purposes and travel modes were converted to trips between activity 
locations for each second during the day. To do so, the Convert Trip utility program in TRANSIMS 
was utilized. Daily trip volumes from the TransCAD model were extracted to form a TRANSIMS 
trip table, and the TRANSIMS smoothing tool was employed to modify the daily distribution of 
trips from this table. Household and vehicle files were the other two major outputs of the Convert 
Trip program. 

Feedback Module and Calibration. The feedback process is the calibration tool in TRANSIMS 
and can be run between two or more modules. It is used to calibrate the model, stabilize travel times 
in the network and yield the desired mode choice, and to correct the network, locations, modes and 
activity times. Connection problems between the links and process links were addressed manually. 
Because  TransCAD  is  not  sensitive  to  network  geometry,  some  links  in  the  imported  network, 
especially ramps, did not follow the proper curvature. As a result, the Microsimulator could not load 
vehicles on the links that exceeded the restriction of maximum connection angle (the angle between 
two links). The authors modified the network by reducing connectivity angles. Several feedbacks 
were performed to improve the activity and plan files and address trips with problems. Two of the 
most common problems were path-building (due to network limitations) and zero-node path (due 
to the aforementioned activity locations for external trips or when the origin and destination are in 
the same link). 

29

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014Also, a feedback was created between the Route Planner and the Microsimulator to stabilize 
travel  times.  The  feedback  loop  randomly  re-routed  10%  of  travelers  until  link  travel  times 
stabilized. The relative stabilization (when the difference between the travel time of the current 
iteration and the previous is negligible) happened after 10 iterations in this study. Despite following 
this approach, it is better always to ensure that user equilibrium occurs. At the first iteration, the 
Route Planner used free-flow travel times to find the shortest path. However, after all vehicles were 
loaded onto the network, the link travel times were higher than the free-flow travel time, especially 
in congested areas. As a result, some routes no longer provided the shortest time path. The random 
re-routing of travelers stabilized link travel times. The results of the calibrated Track-1 TRANSIMS 
model in Table 1 were validated with traffic counts in the same way as the base model and the Sub-
TAZ model. 

New Approaches Versus the Base Model 

Table 1 compares the calibration/validation results of the three models developed for the base year 
2005 along with the FHWA guideline. As the table shows, the base model offers a slightly better 
correlation coefficient but it poorly estimates collector roads. The Sub-TAZ model and TRANSIMS 
estimate traffic volumes on collector roads generally better. Except minor arterials, the Sub-TAZ 
estimation outperforms the base model for all classes of roads. TRANSIMS outperforms the other 
two models for collectors and overestimates traffic on arterials and freeways probably due to a large 
number of external traffic. The estimated traffic volumes versus actual ground traffic counts for all 
three models are in Figure 3. 

Figure 3:  Estimation-Observation Regression Lines for the 
 

2005 Base, Sub-TAZ, and TRANSIMS Models

For validation, the three calibrated models were employed to forecast traffic in 2010 and then 
validated with traffic counts. As indicated in Table 2, the TRANSIMS and Sub-TAZ models had a 
higher correlation coefficient than the base model. The base model forecasted freeway traffic best 
with a 6.2% error compared with the Sub-TAZ model’s 12.1% and TRANSIMS’ 13.2%. However, 
the TRANSIMS model could be calibrated in just the same way as the four-step model. In Table 1, 
the freeways’ error was 11.5%, which is more than the 7% error following the FHWA guidelines 
in the base model. If user equilibrium is applied to the TRANSIMS model and a lower error rate 
is obtained for freeways in 2005, then the 2010 prediction model will give a lower error rate and 
a better forecast of freeway traffic volumes. Traffic volumes on principal and minor arterials were 
forecasted better in TRANSIMS (5.3% and 6.9% error, respectively) than in the Sub-TAZ (8.6% 
and 39.9% error) and the base models (16.6% and 44.3% error). The forecasted volumes and 2010 

30

TRANSIMS Implementationtraffic counts in Figure 4 verify that TRANSIMS and Sub-TAZ models produce less discrepancy in 
short-run forecasting of traffic volumes than the base model.

Table 2: 2010 Forecast Validation Results of the Base, Sub-TAZ, and TRANSIMS Models
Validation
TRANSIMS
Correlation coefficient
Percent error regional-wide
Sum of differences by functional class
Freeway
Principal arterial
Minor arterial

6.2%
-16.6%
44.3%

12.1%
-8.6%
39.9%

Sub-TAZ

0.94
16.4%

Base
0.86
8.0%

0.94
10.5%

13.2%
-5.3%
6.9%

Although traffic counts have been widely used to calibrate and validate the traditional four-step 
models for facilities not affected by signals, speed checks may be a helpful measure to evaluate 
model performance. Consequently, the study used the observed 2010 speed data for the major roads 
in the study area obtained from the Regional Integrated Transportation Information System (RITIS) 
in the CATT Laboratory at the University of Maryland, College Park to evaluate performance. The 
average speed data for mid-weeks (Tuesday to Thursday) of spring and fall 2010 were calculated. 
These  average  speeds  were  then  compared  with  the  modeled  speeds  of  the  base,  Sub-TAZ  and 
TRANSIMS models. Figure 5 shows the percentage differences between the modeled speeds in each 
of the three models compared with observed speeds for congested periods (morning and afternoon 
peak  hours  separately)  for  three  selected  corridors  in  both  directions.  Percentage  differences  in 
traffic volume for Sub-TAZ and TRANSIMS are less than that for the four-step model; whereas, 
TRANSIMS  is  the  best  predictor  for  morning  peak  traffic  volume  and  Sub-TAZ  is  the  best  for 
afternoon peak traffic volume. 

Figure 4:  Forecast-Observation Regression Lines for the 
 
2010 Base, Sub-TAZ, and TRANSIMS Models

31

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014Figure 5:  Observed Speeds Compared to 2010 Modeled Speeds of Base, 
 
 

Sub-TAZ, and TRANSIMS Models for Three Bi-Directional
Corridors (32, 175, and 295)

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

This  study  applied  the  TRANSIMS  model  to  a  small  area  in  Maryland.  The  objective  was  to 
provide critical guidance in transitioning from the traditional four-step modeling to activity-based 
modeling. Many transportation agencies are considering adopting dynamic traffic assignment and/
or activity-based modeling. Since this adoption is a major change, it requires significant effort and 
human resources. This paper proposes a three-phase process to make the transition easier and less 
overwhelming. These phases are labeled Sub-TAZ, Track-1 TRANSIMS, and Track-2 TRANSIMS. 
In  the  first  phase,  Sub-TAZ,  a  transportation  agency  develops  a  more  detailed  transportation 
network and divides the zones into smaller subzones. The result of this phase is a smoother traffic 
volume  than  the  traditional  four-step  model.  The  second  phase,  Track-1  TRANSIMS,  converts 
the detailed network provided in the first phase and trip tables into TRANSIMS format and the 
model is implemented. In the third phase, Track-2 TRANSIMS, a complete activity-based model 
is achieved. The second and third phases can be achieved using packages other than TRANSIMS. 
However, small MPOs can reduce costs by using the FHWA-funded TRANSIMS package instead 
of expensive commercial software (Ullah et al. 2011).

The paper also examines the forecasting capabilities of the models by comparing the results to 
ground traffic counts. The results show that Sub-TAZ yields better forecasts than the conventional 
four-step  model.  The  Track-1  TRANSIMS  model  showed  promising  results;  it  performed  well 
in  forecasting  future  travel  demand  even  without  full  calibration. Applying  user  equilibrium  in 
TRANSIMS is likely to result in more accurate output data. The TRANSIMS model estimated and 
forecasted traffic volumes on minor arterials and collectors better than the two four-step models. 
It also offered better model fit with less error in forecasted data for each facility type. TRANSIMS 
was not successful in replicating observed traffic volumes for freeways due in part to the selected 
study area, which is affected by interference from external traffic entering freeways that cannot be 
properly associated with activity locations. A future direction of this study is to modify Track-2 
TRANSIMS to account for external trips and apply it to the study area. 

Endnotes

1.  The Frank-Wolf method was suggested by Frank and Wolf in 1956 (Sheffi 1985). It is widely 

used in determining equilibrium flows in static transportation network problems. 

32

TRANSIMS ImplementationAcknowledgements

The authors would like to acknowledge and thank the Maryland State Highway Administration’s 
Travel Forecasting Division and Morgan State University’s National Transportation Center for their 
funding support and input throughout the study.

References

Cheng, L.C. and H. Wang. “Modeling User Equilibrium in Microscopic Transportation Simulation.” 
Journal	of	the	Transportation	Research	Forum 52 (2), (2013): 85-102. 

Dixon, M., K. Chang, S. Keecheril, and B. Orton. “Applying the TRANSIMS Model Paradigm to 
the Simulation and Analysis of Transportation and Traffic Control Systems.” National	Institute	for	
Advanced	Transportation	Technology, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, 2007.

Festa, D.C., D. Condino, and G. Mazzulla. “Experimental Tour-Based Travel Demand Models.” 
European	Journal	of	Operational	Research 175 (3), (2006): 1472–1483.

Ismart,  D.  “Calibration  and  Adjustment  of  System  Planning  Models.”  U.S.  Department  of 
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration Publication, FHWA-ED-90-015, 1990.

Jeihani, M. “A Review of Simulation-Based Dynamic Traffic Assignment Models.” Journal	of	the	
Transportation	Research	Forum 46 (2), (2007): 35-46.

Jeihani, M., S. Law, and J.P. Connolly. “Improving Traffic Assignment Model Using Intersection 
Delay Function.” 47th	Annual	Transportation	Research	Forum, New York, NY, 2006a.

Jeihani, M., H.D. Sherali, and A.G. Hobeika. “Computing Dynamic User Equilibrium for Large-
Scale Transportation Networks.” Transportation 33 (6), (2006b): 598-604.

Lawe, S., J. Lobb, A. W. Sadek, and S. Huang. “TRANSIMS Implementation in Chittenden County, 
Vermont: Development, Calibration and Preliminary Sensitivity Analysis.” 88th	TRB	Annual	Meeting	
Proceeding, Washington, D.C. 2009.

Mann, W.W. “New Subarea Traffic Assignment Model and Applications.” 8th	TRB	Conference	on	
the	Application	of	Transportation	Planning	Methods, Corpus Christi, TX, (2002): 273-281. 

Mann, W.W. The	B-Node	Model	User	Manual. Virginia Department of Transportation, 2004.

McNally, M.G. The	Activity-Based	Approach. Center for Activity Systems Analysis, UCI-ITS-AS-
WP-00-4, University of California, Irvine, CA, 2000.

Rilett,  L., A.  Kumar,  and  S.  Doddi.  El  Paso  TRANSIMS  Case  Study.  FHWA/TX-03/0-2107-1, 
Texas Transportation Institute, Arlington, TX, 2003.

Sheffi, Y. Urban	Transportation	Networks:	Equilibrium	Analysis	with	Mathematical	Programming	
Methods. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1985.

Transportation  Research  Board  (TRB).  Metropolitan	 Travel	 Forecasting,	 Current	 Practice	 and	
Future	Direction.	Special	Report	288, Washington, D.C. 2007.

Ullah, M.S., A. Rahman, R. Morocoima-Black, and A. Mohideen. “Travel Demand Modeling for 
a Small Sized MPO Using TRANSIMS.” 90th	TRB	Annual	Meeting	Proceeding, Washington D.C., 
2011.

33

JTRF Volume 53 No. 1, Spring 2014Virginia  Department  of  Transportation  (VDOT).  “Implementing  Activity-Based  Models  in 
Virginia.” VTM Research Paper 09-01, 2009.

Yang,  C.  and  A.  Chen.  “Sensitivity  Analysis  of  the  Combined  Travel  Demand  Model  with 
Applications.” European	Journal	of	Operational	Research 198 (3), (2009): 909–921.

Zhang, Y. and A. Mohammadian. “Microsimulation of Household Travel Survey Data.” 87th	TRB	
Annual	Meeting	Proceeding, Washington DC, 2008.

Zhou, Z., A. Chen, and S.C. Wong. “Alternative Formulations of a Combined Trip Generation, Trip 
Distribution, Modal Split, and Trip Assignment Model.” European	Journal	of	Operational	Research 
198 (1), (2009): 129–138.

Dr. Mansoureh Jeihani	is	an	associate	professor	in	the	Department	of	Transportation	and	Urban	
Infrastructure	Studies	at	Morgan	State	University.	She	has	a	multidisciplinary	background:	a	PhD	
degree	in	civil	(transportation	systems)	engineering,	a	master’s	degree	in	economics,	a	master’s	in	
socio-economics	systems	engineering,	and	a	bachelor’s	degree	in	computer	engineering.	Dr.	Jeihani	
is	interested	in	different	research	areas	such	as	transportation	planning,	transportation	economics,	
intelligent	transportation	systems,	and	travelers’	behavior.	She	has	published	more	than	35	papers	
in	journals	and	conference	proceedings.	She	has	also	been	principal	investigator	for	more	than		10	
research	grants.	

Anam  Ardeshiri  is	 a	 doctorate	 candidate	 in	 the	 Department	 of	 Transportation	 and	 Urban	
Infrastructure	Studies	at	Morgan	State	University,	Baltimore.	He	received	his	master’s	degree	in	
transportation	planning	and	engineering	and	his	bachelor’s	degree	in	civil	engineering	from	Sharif	
University	of	Technology,	Tehran,	in	2007	and	2004,	respectively.	He	has	five	years	of	experience	in	
the	private	sector	and	has	been	working	as	a	research	assistant	in	six	projects	funded	by	state	and	
federal	agencies.

34

TRANSIMS Implementation